Uncertainty-Aware Deployment of Pre-trained Language-Conditioned
Imitation Learning Policies

arXiv:2403.18222v2 [cs.RO] 28 Jul 2024

Bo Wu1 , Bruce D. Lee1 , Kostas Daniilidis1 , Bernadette Bucher1,2 , Nikolai Matni1
Abstract— Large-scale robotic policies trained on data from
diverse tasks and robotic platforms hold great promise for
enabling general-purpose robots; however, reliable generalization to new environment conditions remains a major challenge.
Toward addressing this challenge, we propose a novel approach
for uncertainty-aware deployment of pre-trained languageconditioned imitation learning agents. Specifically, we use
temperature scaling to calibrate these models and exploit the
calibrated model to make uncertainty-aware decisions by aggregating the local information of candidate actions. We implement our approach in simulation using three such pre-trained
models, and showcase its potential to significantly enhance task
completion rates. The accompanying code is accessible at the
link: https://github.com/BobWu1998/uncertainty quant all.git

I. I NTRODUCTION
Inspired by advancements in general-purpose natural language processing and computer vision models, the robotics
community has invested considerable effort in developing
generalist decision making agents that operate across various
robotic platforms and perform a broad spectrum of tasks [1].
These so-called “foundation models” are typically trained
once on a large and diverse dataset, then deployed in a
specific setting with minimal task-specific fine-tuning. Such
pre-trained models have been shown to generalize in many
ways such as to new tasks, new robot platforms, and new
environments [2–5].
However, the extent of these agents’ generalization abilities remains poorly understood. A significant barrier hindering the generalization abilities and our understanding of
them is the lack of well-calibrated, task-specific uncertainty
estimates. This gap precludes the possibility of making
uncertainty-aware decisions. Our work aims to close this
gap by proposing a calibration enabled uncertainty-aware
decision making protocol to boost the success rate for
language-conditioned imitation learning (IL) policies.
A. Contributions
We propose a straightforward yet effective modification
to enhance the generalization capabilities of pre-trained
language-conditioned imitation learning agents for robotic
manipulation. The modification is composed of two components, outlined in Figure 1:
1
• A calibration step, tailored to the task of interest,
that refines the model’s outputs to generate confidence
1 GRASP Lab, University of Pennsylvania: {bobwu, brucele,
kostas, nmatni}@seas.upenn.edu
2 Robotics

Department,

University

of

Michigan:

bucherb@umich.edu
BL and NM gratefully acknowledge support from NSF Award SLES
2331880, NSF CAREER award ECCS 2045834, and NSF EECS 2231349.
1 We refer to calibration in the statistical sense [6].

Fig. 1: Overview of uncertainty-aware action selection on top of
pre-trained models. The blue cross indicates the maximum score in
the heatmap. The upper path illustrate the standard deployment of
pre-trained IL policies at test time in which the output of the pretrained model directly predicts the action. The bottom path indicates
our proposed approach, in which the model is calibrated using a
small dataset of expert demonstrations from the task of interest
before selecting the action in an uncertainty-aware manner.

scores that approximate the correctness likelihood for
imitating the expert.
• An uncertainty-aware action selection technique using
the probability distribution output by the calibrated
model (See Algorithm 1).
Each of these steps is novel, and may be of independent
interest. However, we view our primary contribution as the
holistic integration of these two components into the decision
making pipeline for language-conditioned IL policies.
We instantiate our approach on several robotic manipulation models, including the Perceiver-Actor model [7],
the RVT model [8], and the CLIPort model [9] without
additional training, and show that using a small calibration
dataset of expert demonstrations from the target task can
lead to a substantial improvement in task completion rate.
Through comprehensive experimentation, we identify scenarios where integrating uncertainty quantification into the
decision making process is most beneficial. Our experiments
also find that existing pre-trained models provide poorly
calibrated likelihood estimates when instantiated on any particular task of interest. Therefore, appropriately calibrating
the model for the task of interest is essential to reap the
rewards of uncertainty-aware decision making.
B. Related Work
a) Generalist Robotic Policies: Early efforts [2] introduce a diverse and extensive robotics dataset, and use
this dataset to train visual foresight and supervised inverse
models. By conditioning IL agents with a description of

the task to complete, subsequent work uses such diverse
datasets to enable sample-efficient IL [3, 10–12]. Recent
developments have embraced transformer-based architecture
to train multi-modal decision making agents [13, 14] and
language-conditioned IL policies for robotic manipulation
[4, 5, 7–9]. Efforts have also been made to extend to more
general prompt conditioning using images and videos [15].
In Shah et al. [16], the authors explore the development
of a generalist visual navigation model. For a review of
generalist decision making agents, see Yang et al. [1]. Our
work improves the performance of these generalist robotic
policies by incorporating calibrated uncertainty estimates to
enable more informed decisions at inference time.
b) Uncertainty Quantification: For robotic decision
making, confidence scores quantifying the model output
uncertainty enable downstream formulations of safe decisions in robotic planning problems [17–19]. However, it has
been shown that the confidence scores output by modern
classification models are poorly calibrated in that they are
not representative of the true correctness likelihood [6].
While numerous approaches to improving calibration posthoc exist, such as temperature scaling [6] and conformal
prediction [20], these techniques are seldom applied in the
realm of pre-trained language-conditioned imitation learning
policies to enhance generalization performance. A notable
exception is the recent work by Ren et al. [21] which applies
conformal prediction to language-based planners to request
operator clarification in the face of ambiguity. In contrast, we
consider a setting in which there is no ambiguity in the taskconditioning, but rather the pre-trained model is imperfect.
We calibrate the uncertainty of this pre-trained model, and
use it to select actions in an uncertainty-aware manner. For
further discussion of uncertainty quantification of foundation
models for robotic decision making, see Firoozi et al. [22].
II. A PPROACH
A. Background: Language-conditioned IL for Robotic Manipulation
We consider robotic manipulation problems in a discretetime decision making context. Let ot ∈ O be the observation
of the world at time t and at ∈ A be an action applied to the
robot at time t. Here, A is a finite, discretized action space.
Language-conditioned IL assumes access to n expert
demonstrations {ζ1 , . . . , ζn } accompanied by languageconditioning {c1 , . . . , cn }. Each demonstration consists of
a trajectory of observations, and the corresponding actions
taken by an expert. The language-conditioning ci provides
information about the task which the corresponding expert
demonstration is completing. Using these demonstrations,
the learner searches for a policy which imitates the expert
behavior for the given language conditioning.
As the action space is discrete, the policy operates as
a classifier for the observation-language pair. In particular,
given some observation o ∈ O and language-conditioning c,
the policy selects an action as
π̂(o, c) = argmax fˆj(a) (o, c).
(1)
a∈A

Here, j : A → [|A|] is a function enumerating A, and
fˆ is a function which takes in an observation o and a
language conditioning c to output a vector of logits fˆ(o, c)
with fˆj(a) (o, c) representing its j(a)th element.
A policy of the form mentioned above may be determined
from the expert demonstrations and language-conditioning
using behavior cloning. In particular, the learner may choose
fˆ belonging to some function class to minimize the cross
entropy loss, as in Brohan et al. [4] and Shridhar et al. [7].
The resultant function, fˆ, serves as a pre-trained model,
which can be deployed on numerous different tasks. In
particular, given some new language conditioning cn+1 , it
is deployed to select the robot’s actions as at = π̂(ot , cn+1 ).
In general, the target task need not be one of the tasks used
for training; we may have cn+1 ∈
/ {c1 , . . . , cn }. However,
many of our experimental results are focused on the setting
where cn+1 ∈ {c1 , . . . , cn }.
Pre-trained models using the aforementioned strategy to
select an action neglect pertinent information output by the
model about the distribution of potential actions. This is in
part because such pre-trained models tend to be poorly calibrated and fail to reflect the actual correctness likelihood of
prediction matching the expert demonstration. Accordingly,
we address these problems by calibrating the model and
then following an uncertainty-aware action selection strategy,
which is discussed in Section II-B and Section II-C.
B. Target Task Calibration
The logits can be viewed as a representation of a probability distribution p over possible actions by applying the
softmax function σSM to the output of the model fˆ: p =
σSM (fˆ(o, c)). While p is a viable probability distribution, it
may not be well-aligned with the true correctness likelihood
for imitating the expert, especially for the specific task cn+1 .
To improve the alignment between the distribution p
and the correctness likelihood for task cn+1 , we collect a
calibration set from task cn+1 . In particular, we assume that
the target language-conditioning cn+1 is drawn randomly
from some distribution cn+1 ∼ Dtest , and thatwe have access
to a calibration set of expert demonstrations  ζ1cal , . . . , ζkcal
cal
along with their associated conditioning ccal
,
1 , . . . , ck
cal
where ci are drawn from the same distribution as cn+1 :
ccal
i ∼ Dtest . Calibrated models may be obtained from this
set with various methods, but we propose using temperature
scaling [6]. Specifically, we determine the optimal temperature parameter T̂ as the value of T which minimizes the
cross entropy loss of the model T1 fˆ over the calibration set.
Given this temperature parameter, we define the calibrated
model outputting
the probability scores as p̃ = f˜(o, c) =

fˆ(o,c)
σSM
, with components p̃k = f˜k (o, c).
T̂
C. Uncertainty-Aware Action Selection
The greedy action selection approach of equation (1)
does not make use of the calibrated confidence scores from
Section II-B, and overlooks important structure of the action
space. Specifically, distinct elements in A may represent
similar actions. This structure should be leveraged in the

Model
PerAct
RVT
CLIPort

Baseline
0.382 ± 0.012
0.602 ± 0.012
0.803 ± 0.005

Uncalibrated UA
0.385 ± 0.012
0.607 ± 0.012
0.833 ± 0.005

Calibrated UA
0.414 ± 0.012
0.623 ± 0.011
0.833 ± 0.005

TABLE I: Summary of results for calibrated and uncalibrated
uncertainty-aware approach and the uncertainty oblivious (baseline)
approach on PerAct, RVT, and CLIPort. For PerAct and RVT, the
values in the table represent the portion of successfully completed
tasks. For CLIPort, the values represent the mean reward, where
the maximum reward for an episode is one if the desired task is
completed successfully. Standard errors are shown.

manipulation problem, as many tasks can be completed with
distinct, but similar actions, e.g. a robotic gripper can open
a drawer by pulling at different positions of the handle.
We propose Algorithm 1 to remedy the above shortcoming. Rather than selecting the action with the highest
confidence score, Algorithm 1 selects the action for which
the neighboring region of potential actions has the highest
sum of confidence scores. The neighboring region of an
action a ∈ A is defined as {a′ : d(a, a′ ) ≤ τ } , where the
metric d is selected based on the problem at hand to capture
similarity between two actions in A, and τ is a similarity
threshold. While both the metric d and the threshold τ are
hand-designed in this work, they could be chosen in a datadriven manner in future work. Note that while the greedy
action selection approach in equation (1) is only sensitive to
the ordering of highest confidence score output by the model,
Algorithm 1 needs a well-calibrated model to adequately
determine the confidence of the neighboring region.
Algorithm 1 Uncertainty-Aware Action Selection
Calibrated model f˜, conditioning c, observation
o, robustness threshold τ
2: Compute p̃1 , . . . , p̃|A| = f˜(o, c).
P
′
3: Set â = argmaxa∈A
a′ ∈A p̃j(a′ ) 1(d(a, a ) < τ )
4: Output: Uncertainty-aware action â
1: Input:

In Algorithm 1, our method assumes to take a calibrated
model f˜, a language conditioning of the task c, the observation o, and the robustness threshold τ as input. At
each time step, the calibrated model f˜ produces a vector of
logits p̃, based on task conditioning and observation. Then,
the approach calculates the uncertainty-aware score for the
actions by aggregating the neighboring confidence scores of
each candidate, where two actions a and a′ are considered
“neighbors” if d(a, a′ ) < τ . Finally, the model makes the
decision about the action based on the highest confidence
score produced in the previous step.
Note that the approach for selecting the action from the
calibrated model in Line 3 of Algorithm 1 is just one
possibility for aggregating the confidence of neighboring
actions. An alternative is to convolve the output of the
calibrated model with a Gaussian kernel. This approach
is discussed in Appendix B.2. Another alternative is to
construct prediction sets using conformal prediction, and
then select a representative from the set.
A key feature of the proposed approach is that the weights

of the pre-trained model are not updated, as it can be
both computationally and statistically prohibitive to fine-tune
the model. As a result, the efficacy of an agent using the
proposed approach is still bottle-necked by the quality of
the pre-trained agent. We therefore expect improvements in
the performance from leveraging uncertainty-aware decision
making to be limited to some degree by the quality of the
pre-trained model. In our experiments, we highlight several
cases where the performance boost is most notable, and offer
explanations for why this may be the case.
III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We evaluate the method discussed in Section II by deploying it on three pre-trained models: the PerAct model
[7], the RVT model [8], and the CLIPort model [9]. PerAct
and RVT are evaluated on the RLBench dataset [23], while
CLIPort is evaluated in the Ravens benchmark [24]. Each
of these datasets breaks down the desired behavior of the
robot into tasks. A task consists of a small collection of
related language conditionings. For example, the RLBench
task “stack blocks” consists of language-conditionings:2
• “place three of the blue cubes on top of each other”
• “build a tall tower out of four green cubes”
• “place two of the red cubes on top of each other”
Within each task for both the RLBench dataset and the
Ravens dataset, the variations of language-conditionings are
sampled uniformly at random from the set of task-specific
variations built into the environments. We therefore calibrate
the models for particular tasks by obtaining expert demonstrations corresponding to language-conditionings sampled
uniformly at random from a particular task.
PerAct and RVT were trained on a dataset consisting of
100 expert demonstrations for each of 18 distinct RLBench
tasks. We evaluate our approach on each model on all 18 of
the tasks they were trained on. For each task, we calibrate
the model using temperature scaling with a calibration set of
25 expert demonstrations, and evaluate on 100 episodes.
CLIPort was trained on 1000 demonstrations from each
of 9 distinct tasks from the Ravens dataset. We evaluate our
approach on four of the nine tasks that the model was trained
on (discussed in Section III-A). On each task, we calibrate
the model on 100 expert demonstrations using temperature
scaling. Evaluations are performed on 1000 episodes.3
The results from running uncertainty-aware action selection on the three models are summarized in Table I. We see
that the uncertainty-aware approach offers a benefit to the
overall task completion rate for all models. To investigate
exactly when the approach provides a benefit, the subsequent
sections study three pertinent questions, summarized below.
1) Section III-A: Why does uncertainty-aware action
selection help? Uncertainty-aware action selection
prevents the end effector from moving to positions
described by isolated, high-confidence locations output
2 See [23] for all language-conditionings of all tasks.
3 For further details about the implementation of uncertainty-aware action
selection on these models, see Appendix A and Appendix B.

(a) Put Gray Block on the Lightest Brown Block

(b) Pack All the Spatula with Purple Head
Objects in the Brown Box

(c) Put the Brown Ring In the Brown Box

Fig. 2: Qualitative results for CLIPort with and without uncertainty-aware action selection. The language commands are in the subfigure
captions. From top to bottom, each row represents the model’s observation, the heatmap in pick phase, the heatmap in place phase, and
the observation after executing the actions. In 2a and 2b, our method forces the model to choose a central location on the target object
instead of the edges. In 2c, our method corrects the model by smoothing out the action with highest raw score.
Task
stack-block-pyramid-seq
seen-colors
packing-seen-google
objects-seq
packing-seen-google
objects-group
assembling-kits-seq
seen-colors
Task with Distractors
stack-block-pyramid-seq
seen-colors-diff-sizes
assembling-kits-seq
seen-colors-diff-sizes

Baseline

UA

0.9475 ± 0.0047

0.9815 ± 0.0027

0.8090 ± 0.0104

0.8275 ± 0.0100

0.8846 ± 0.0080

0.9108 ± 0.0072

0.5706 ± 0.0116

0.6134 ± 0.0115

small distractor objects to the scene can have a devastating performance of the pre-trained model. However,
uncertainty-aware action selection achieves essentially
the same performance it does in the absence of distractors. This provides a strong indication that accounting
for uncertainty-aware action selection can improve
generalization to certain task distribution shifts.

Baseline

UA

0.7963 ± 0.0073

0.9711 ± 0.0031

A. Why Does Uncertainty-Aware Action Selection Help?

0.4832 ± 0.0028

0.5544 ± 0.0030

To investigate why uncertainty-aware action selection
helps, we first look at the per-task success rates of the
CLIPort model. In the first four rows of Table II, we compare
uncertainty-aware action selection with the baseline on four
tasks from the Ravens dataset. From the results, we find
that incorporating uncertainty is particularly useful when the
CLIPort task requires precise placement of target objects.
This is important for stacking blocks, packing objects, and
assembling kits. The reason that uncertainty awareness is
beneficial in these settings is that it enables conservative
decisions in the picking phase by encouraging the end
effector to pick up the object at the center instead of at the
edges, as illustrated in Figure 1, Figure 2a, and Figure 2b.
In these examples, our method takes the calibrated score
map of the baseline (left column of the second row), and
generates uncertainty-aware score calculation (right column
of the second row). Conditioned on the more conservative
picking location, the agent picks up the object more easily
and finds a better placing location, as shown in the third

TABLE II: Task-specific mean rewards for CLIPort on four tasks
from the original Ravens dataset and two tasks with small distractors added to the original tasks.

by the pre-trained model. This can prevent the gripper
from completely missing the object, and encourages a
better grip when it is successful in gripping the object.
2) Section III-B: Is calibration necessary? It depends
on the model. For simple models trained on very large
datasets (CLIPort), the pre-trained model appears to be
fairly well calibrated, and calibration is not necessary
to achieve the benefit of uncertainty-aware decisions.
Both PerAct and RVT are poorly calibrated on any
given task, and calibrating the model is critical to
achieve the benefit of uncertainy-aware decisions.
3) Section III-C: Can uncertainty-awareness enable
generalzation to new settings? We demonstrate that

Fig. 3: Success rate score for Perceiver-Actor, uncertainty-aware strategy with calibrated/uncalibrated confidence for each task

Fig. 4: Success rate score for RVT, uncertainty-aware strategy with calibrated/uncalibrated confidence for each task

row. The bottom row of each step shows the result of the
manipulation at the current time step.
Additionally, by smoothing confidence scores across possible actions, the uncertainty-aware approach prevents the end
effector from selecting isolated high-confidence actions. The
benefit of this is illustrated in the second row of Figure 2c.
The per task success rates of PerAct are shown in Figure 3
while the per task success rates of RVT are shown in
Figure 4. Due to the higher complexity of the tasks from
RLBench and the higher standard error in the results, it is
difficult to draw concrete conclusions about when the benefit
of accounting for uncertainty is most important. However,
we do see the most pronounced improvement on tasks with a
lower success rate. This benefit appears to be due to the larger
discrepancy between the action with the highest confidence
score and the action with the largest sum of neighboring
confidence scores on tasks for which the model is overall
less confident. In particular, we plot the maximum entropy
of the translation distribution output by PerAct for each

task in Figure 5. We see that for the push buttons task,
it has the highest success rate and the lowest maximum
entropy. Meanwhile, the highest maximum entropy comes
from the task put groceries in cupboard, upon which we see
a significant boost coming from our method.
In light of the above experimental results, we conclude
that by encouraging the model to select actions with higher
neighboring confidence scores, our method prevents the
model from choosing aggresive action candidates, thereby
resulting in better grasping performance.
B. Do we need calibration?
We see in Table I that for both PerAct and RVT, the
uncertainty-aware action provides only a very small improvement in the absence of calibration (0.3% and 0.5% boost
in task success rate, respectively); however, they yield a
significant task success rate if a calibration step is included
(3.2% and 2.1% boosts, respectively).
To understand why this is the case, we construct reliability
diagrams in Figure 6. The figure depicts this reliability

(a) uncalibrated

Fig. 5: Maximum entropy over all episodes in each task of PerAct

diagram for PerAct on two tasks, with both the uncailbrated
model and the model calibrated using temperature scaling.
The y-axis is the model accuracy (the correctness likelihood)
at each confidence level, which is the number of predicted
actions that are the same as the expert demonstration, divided
by the total number of predictions made with confidence
within the thresholding interval. The x-axis depicts the model
confidence, which is maximum value in the probabilty distribution representing the calibrated model: maxa∈A f˜a (o, c).
The confidence is perfectly calibrated when the accuracy
and the confidence are linearly related with slope of one.
For more details on reliability diagrams, see Guo et al. [6].
These diagrams illustrate the value of temperature scaling
for improving model calibration using a calibration set of 25
expert demonstrations from the task of interest. From these
results, we conclude that PerAct has very poorly calibrated
uncertainty measurements, but applying temperature scaling
using a small number of demonstrations from a specific task
improves calibration substantially.
The importance of this calibration is further reflected by
the improvement offered by the calibrated uncertainty-aware
approach over the uncalibrated uncertainty-aware approach
in Table I. As in Table I, RVT benefits from temperature scaling. However, CLIPort does not see a benefit of temperature
scaling in improving the success rate of uncertainty-aware
action selection. We find that the calibrating cross-entropy
loss barely changes during from calibration, indicating that
the pre-trained model is already fairly well-calibrated for
each of the individual tasks.
C. Can Uncertainty-Awareness Improve Generalization?
To determine whether uncertainty-aware decisions can
help pre-trained models generalize to out-of-distribution settings, we designed two new tasks. One of these is a modification of stack blocks, and the other one is a modification
of the assemble kits task. Both of the new tasks introduce
a collection of smaller-sized target objects of various colors
and shapes, which serve as distractors to the model. In the
last two rows of Table II, we find that the pre-trained method
is very fragile to such distractors, and they cause a massive

(b) Calibrated

Fig. 6: Reliability diagrams are shown for PerAct on two of
the RLBench tasks. Figure 6a illustrates the reliability diagrams
before calibration, while Figure 6b shows the reliability diagrams
after running temperature scaling on a calibration set of 25 expert
demonstrations from the each task. Overlayed on the plot is the
value for the expected calibration error (ECE, see Guo et al. [6] for
further details). We see that temperature scaling provides a marked
improvement in the calibration.

drop in performance from 94.75% completion to 79.63% for
stacking blocks, and from 57.06% to 48.32% for assembling
kits. However, the uncertainty-aware approach is robust to
such distractors: performance degrades only from 98.15%
and 61.34% completion to 97.11% and 55.44%, respectively.
In Figure 7, we demonstrate the impact of the distractors
on the pre-trained model. We see that the precense of
distractors causes the pre-trained model to pick up one of
the distractor blocks which has a single pixel of high confidence. The uncertainty-aware approach smooths the heatmap,
thereby determining that the isolated high confidence event
is due to a distractor, and that the best course of action is
to select a region where the model output a collection of
neighboring actions with high confidence.
More generally, we believe these results indicate the
potential value of incorporating uncertainty estimates for
decision making in out-of-distribution scenarios.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the use of simple classification model calibration techniques in conjunction with an
uncertainty-aware action selection approach to improve the
success rates for language-conditioned imitation learning in

description of the task, and a top-down virtual RGB-D image
of the scene. See Shridhar et al. [9], Zeng et al. [24] for
further details. Note that both picking and placing outputs
a two dimensional heatmap of confidence scores for the
appropriate end effector location. Applying algorithm 1, we
calculate the uncertainty-aware heatmap and determine the
appropriate picking location. For the orientation during the
place step, we directly trust the output of pre-trained model.
All hyperparameters are determined by performing a parameter sweep using cross validation.
B. Additional Implementation Details

Fig. 7: Qualitative results of CLIPort on instruction ”Put the brown
block on the blue and red blocks” when distractors are introduced.

robotic manipulation. Our results suggest that by appropriately calibrating the model and incorporating an uncertaintyaware decision making strategy, we can benefit the pretrained “foundation models” in both seen and unseen tasks.
This approach does not require any additional training or
fine-tuning of the original model and is scalable to versatile
robot manipulation models and platforms.
The modest, though notable performance boost that occurs
by incorporating uncertainty-aware decisions for pre-trained
models highlights the potential for such approaches for
generalist robotic policies in general. An exciting avenue
for future work is to obtain calibrated uncertainty models
for generalist dynamics forecasting which can then be used
as part of an uncertainty-aware trajectory planning or model
predictive control scheme.
A PPENDIX
A. Model details
For PerAct and RVT, the action space consists of three
coordinates for the discretized desired end effector translation, three coordinates for the discretized desired end effector
rotation, and two binary values indicating gripper status and
collision avoidance module activation. The desired action is
then achieved using a sampling-based motion planner. The
world state is represented by a voxel observation of the
environment. PerAct directly takes this voxel obseration as an
input (see [7]), while RVT takes five RGB-D virtual camera
projections of this voxel observations as input (see Goyal
et al. [8]). Due to differences between the output of each
model, and the structure assumed by our approach in (1)
and due to computational challenges of Algorithm 1 in high
dimensions, we make several model-specific adjustments to
the uncertainty-aware action selection. See Appendix B.1 and
Appendix B.2 for PerAct and RVT, respectively.
CLIPort instead breaks tasks into a sequence of pickand-place actions. Each pick action is described by the two
dimensional end effector location, while each place action is
described by the two dimensional end effector location and
the one dimensional end effector orientation. For each pick
and place step, the CLIPort model takes as input the language

1) PerAct: The action space A is very large, and it is
computationally expensive to search over the entire action
space to calculate the neighboring confidence for each action.
Meanwhile, while the probability output from a well-trained
model can span the entire action space, there are relatively
few entries with high confidence scores. For these reasons,
we restrict our uncertainty-aware action selection search
to translation actions that have relatively high confidence
scores. For rotation, gripper status, and collision avoidance
module activation, we directly trust the pre-trained model.
To restrict the action search space, we make several
modifications to Algorithm 1. These are summarized in
Algorithm 2. Our method assumes that we have a calibrated
model f˜. First we apply a probability threshold to filter
out the actions with probabilities higher than this threshold.
Then, if the resulting action space has more than k elements,
we keep only the top k of them. After this, we select the
center of the remaining actions, define a search space H
around the center with radius D/2, and go loop through the
actions in the search space. For each action a, we extract the
remaining actions a′ ∈ A′ around it with d(a, a′ ) < τ , and
calculate the accumulative scores for a. Finally, we take the
action with the greatest accumulative score to be our desired
action. This mitigates the computational problem described
above by overlooking non-informative parts in the model’s
output. We choose α = 1/|A| and k = 4000.
Algorithm 2 Detailed UA Action Selection Strategy
Calibrated model f˜, conditioning c, observation
o, threshold τ , probability threshold α, search size D.
2: Compute action probabilities: p̃1 , . . . , p̃|A| = f˜(o; c).
3: A′ = {a ∈ A, p̃a > α},
4: if |A′ | > k: keep k actions in A′ with the highest scores
5: c = mean(a′ ∈ A′ )
6: H= { a ∈ [c − D/2, c + D/2]3 ∩ A }
P
′
7: Set â = argmaxa∈H
a′ ∈A′ p̃j(a′ ) 1(d(a, a ) < τ )
8: Output: Uncertainty-aware action â
1: Input:

2) RVT: RVT is modified from PerAct to predict the
heatmap for the translation in virtual image planes instead
of the raw 3D voxel space. As such, we adjust Algorithm 1
to work with the 2D output accordingly. For each heatmap,
we convolve it with a Gaussian blurring kernel to get an
uncertainty-aware heatmap and reconstruct a 3D uncertainty-

aware point cloud.4 We apply this convolution strategy
in 1D space for each axis of rotation. Consequently, the
uncertainty-aware action decision is made over the resulting
uncertainty-aware heatmaps for both translation and rotation.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Yang, O. Nachum, Y. Du, J. Wei, P. Abbeel,
and D. Schuurmans, “Foundation models for decision
making: Problems, methods, and opportunities,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.04129, 2023.
[2] S. Dasari, F. Ebert, S. Tian, S. Nair, B. Bucher,
K. Schmeckpeper, S. Singh, S. Levine, and C. Finn,
“Robonet: Large-scale multi-robot learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.11215, 2019.
[3] F. Ebert, Y. Yang, K. Schmeckpeper, B. Bucher,
G. Georgakis, K. Daniilidis, C. Finn, and S. Levine,
“Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic
skills with cross-domain datasets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.13396, 2021.
[4] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis,
C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog,
J. Hsu et al., “Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817,
2022.
[5] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar,
X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess,
A. Dubey, C. Finn et al., “Rt-2: Vision-language-action
models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
[6] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On
calibration of modern neural networks,” in International
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2017, pp.
1321–1330.
[7] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Perceiver-actor:
A multi-task transformer for robotic manipulation,” in
Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 785–
799.
[8] A. Goyal, J. Xu, Y. Guo, V. Blukis, Y.-W. Chao, and
D. Fox, “Rvt: Robotic view transformer for 3d object
manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14896, 2023.
[9] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Cliport: What
and where pathways for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 894–
906.
[10] Y. Ding, C. Florensa, P. Abbeel, and M. Phielipp,
“Goal-conditioned imitation learning,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[11] S. Stepputtis, J. Campbell, M. Phielipp, S. Lee,
C. Baral, and H. Ben Amor, “Language-conditioned imitation learning for robot manipulation tasks,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp.
13 139–13 150, 2020.
4 A Gaussian blurring kernel is a generalization of the weighted sum in
Line 3 from Algorithm 1. The width and standard deviation of this kernel
are treated as hyperparameters that are determined via cross validation. We
apply it only in this setting because the convolution becomes only a 2D
convolution, which is necessary in the image space.

[12] C. Lynch and P. Sermanet, “Language conditioned imitation learning over unstructured data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.07648, 2020.
[13] S. Reed, K. Zolna, E. Parisotto, S. G. Colmenarejo,
A. Novikov, G. Barth-Maron, M. Gimenez, Y. Sulsky,
J. Kay, J. T. Springenberg et al., “A generalist agent,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
[14] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu
et al., “Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language
model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
[15] Y. Jiang, A. Gupta, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Dou,
Y. Chen, L. Fei-Fei, A. Anandkumar, Y. Zhu, and
L. Fan, “Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal prompts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03094,
2022.
[16] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, N. Dashora, K. Stachowicz,
K. Black, N. Hirose, and S. Levine, “Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.14846, 2023.
[17] L. Lindemann, M. Cleaveland, G. Shim, and G. J.
Pappas, “Safe planning in dynamic environments using
conformal prediction,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2023.
[18] A. Dixit, L. Lindemann, S. X. Wei, M. Cleaveland,
G. J. Pappas, and J. W. Burdick, “Adaptive conformal
prediction for motion planning among dynamic agents,”
in Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 300–314.
[19] J. Lekeufack, A. A. Angelopoulos, A. Bajcsy, M. I.
Jordan, and J. Malik, “Conformal decision theory:
Safe autonomous decisions from imperfect predictions,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05921, 2023.
[20] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9,
no. 3, 2008.
[21] A. Z. Ren, A. Dixit, A. Bodrova, S. Singh, S. Tu,
N. Brown, P. Xu, L. Takayama, F. Xia, J. Varley
et al., “Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment
for large language model planners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.01928, 2023.
[22] R. Firoozi, J. Tucker, S. Tian, A. Majumdar, J. Sun,
W. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Song, A. Kapoor, K. Hausman et al., “Foundation models in robotics: Applications, challenges, and the future,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.07843, 2023.
[23] S. James, Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison,
“Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark & learning
environment,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3019–3026, 2020.
[24] A. Zeng, P. Florence, J. Tompson, S. Welker, J. Chien,
M. Attarian, T. Armstrong, I. Krasin, D. Duong,
V. Sindhwani et al., “Transporter networks: Rearranging the visual world for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 726–
747.

