Diff-DAgger: Uncertainty Estimation with
Diffusion Policy for Robotic Manipulation

arXiv:2410.14868v4 [cs.RO] 24 Mar 2025

Sung-Wook Lee1 , Xuhui Kang1 , Yen-Ling Kuo1
Abstract— Recently, diffusion policy has shown impressive
results in handling multi-modal tasks in robotic manipulation.
However, it has fundamental limitations in out-of-distribution
failures that persist due to compounding errors and its limited
capability to extrapolate. One way to address these limitations
is robot-gated DAgger, an interactive imitation learning with
a robot query system to actively seek expert help during
policy rollout. While robot-gated DAgger has high potential
for learning at scale, existing methods like Ensemble-DAgger
struggle with highly expressive policies: They often misinterpret
policy disagreements as uncertainty at multi-modal decision
points. To address this problem, we introduce Diff-DAgger,
an efficient robot-gated DAgger algorithm that leverages the
training objective of diffusion policy. We evaluate Diff-DAgger
across different robot tasks including stacking, pushing, and
plugging, and show that Diff-DAgger improves the task failure
prediction by 39.0%, the task completion rate by 20.6%, and
reduces the wall-clock time by a factor of 7.8. We hope that this
work opens up a path for efficiently incorporating expressive
yet data-hungry policies into interactive robot learning settings.
The project website is available at: https://diffdagger.github.io.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Imitation learning for manipulation tasks poses significant
challenges due to the need for long-horizon decision making,
high precision, and adaptability in dynamic environments.
Recently, significant advances have been made using offline
approaches, also known as behavior cloning, by adopting
generative models for action sequence prediction. These
models mitigate the compounding error issue by reducing
the number of action inferences [1] and addressing multimodality through generative capabilities [2]. In particular,
diffusion policy [3] trains the model to predict the gradient
of the action score function, and it has achieved state-of-theart results for learning different robotic tasks.
While diffusion policy effectively handles highly multimodal demonstrations, it still faces a core issue of behavior
cloning: the out-of-distribution (OOD) failure, where the
policy compounds errors in action prediction and cannot
extrapolate in unseen states. A common strategy to address
OOD failure is DAgger [4], an interactive learning method
which iteratively refines the policy by incorporating expert
interventions. In particular, robot-gated DAgger lets robots
decide when to seek expert help, removing the need for
constant human supervision and enabling large-scale learning
across multiple robots [5]. The effectiveness of this approach,
therefore, relies heavily on the robot’s ability to accurately
estimate its own uncertainty.
1 University of Virginia

{dcs3zc,xuhui,ylkuo}@virginia.edu

However, none of the existing robot-gated DAgger approaches fully addresses the multi-modality present in
demonstration data. For example, the most widely adopted
Ensemble-DAgger approaches use the action variance among
an ensemble of policies to estimate uncertainty [6–8]. This
means that when tasks admit multiple solutions, policies
might erroneously indicate high uncertainty even when in
a previously visited state. We illustrate this problem with
a 2D navigation example (Figure 2 (a)), where two primary paths—clockwise and counter-clockwise around a circle—lead to the goal. This scenario allows us to categorize regions as in-distribution uni-modal (along the circular paths, shown as mixed red and orange), in-distribution
multi-modal (at the path divergence point, shown as green),
and out-of-distribution (significant deviations from expected
paths, shown as blue). While ensemble methods for robotgated DAgger effectively distinguish in-distribution unimodal from out-of-distribution data using action variance,
they fail at in-distribution multi-modal points due to policy
disagreement (Figure 2 (b)).

Incorporating an expressive policy class that handles
multi-modal data into the DAgger framework is a promising
but under-explored direction. In light of this, we propose
Diff-DAgger, an efficient robot-gated DAgger algorithm that
addresses multi-modality in demonstration data while reducing wall-clock time compared to other methods. DiffDAgger uses a query system based on the loss function of
the diffusion model, referred to as diffusion loss, which significantly improves the effectiveness of robot queries across
various evaluation metrics. In five challenging manipulation
tasks, including two real-world tasks, Diff-DAgger achieves
a 39.0% higher F1 score in predicting task failure, and
the collected data leads to 20.6% improvements in policy
performance while improving the wall clock time by a factor
of 7.8 in comparison to the baseline methods.

We make the following contributions: First, we develop
a novel robot-gated query system based on diffusion loss
to better handle multi-modality in expert demonstrations.
Second, we quantitatively evaluate Diff-DAgger’s efficiency
in terms of task failure prediction, task completion, and
wall-clock time during interactive learning to demonstrate its
superiority over other baseline methods. Lastly, we discuss
design choices that accelerate policy learning to enable faster
convergence and improved overall performance.

(a) Diffusion Policy
CNN-based
Diffusion Policy

fθ

(b) Diff-DAgger

a

State

a

..... a
Repeat
K Iterations

Denoised
Action

Inference

Inference
Action

ae
Action

ϵ

Policy
Rollout

1. Calculate Loss

~
ae

Noised
Action

L(fθ(oe, ~
ae), ϵ)

State

ar

ar = fθ(or, ar)
2. Calculate Loss

Noised
Action

State

or

Kiter

o

oe

1. Get Action

ar L
Robot
Action

Training

L(fθ(or, ~
ar), ϵ)

Y

Decision

2. Minimize Loss

ar

Robot
Action

θ ≈ argmin Lθ

Noise

Store

Expert Data

~
ar

Robot Task

Noised
Action

L Low?

Diffusion
Loss

Robot
Action

N

ϵ
Noise

Expert
Takeover

Expert Takeover
Expert Demo

Fig. 1: Overview of Diff-DAgger. (a) Diffusion Policy and Training: In our study, we use the diffusion policy with a U-net architecture,
a CNN-based model. During the training phase, diffusion policy is trained on static expert data. (b) Diff-DAgger during Deployment:
At each timestep during the online learning phase, the robot performs two steps—inference and decision. In the inference step, the
policy makes action inference by iteratively denoising a random noise, conditioned on the current observation. After action generation,
the training loss function is used to compute the loss associated with the generated action. In the decision step, the robot proceeds with
the action if the loss is low, otherwise it asks the expert to intervene. The arrows indicate the flow of steps.

(a)

Start

Goal

(b)

policy distribution cannot perfectly match that of the expert
distribution, also known as the covariate shift problem. [9].
Interactive imitation learning combats this issue through
online expert intervention to recover from undesired states
visited by the trained policy. One approach in interactive
imitation learning is human-gated DAgger (HG-DAgger)
[10], where a human supervisor decides when to correct a
robot’s actions. However, this requires continuous, one-onone monitoring, making it resource-intensive and unscalable
for parallel learning with multiple robots. The alternative
method is called the robot-gated DAgger, which requires
the robot to autonomously estimate its own uncertainty. A
common challenge in interactive imitation learning is to
maximize the utility of expert intervention while minimizing
the burden on the expert.
B. Uncertainty Estimation of Robot Action

Fig. 2: (a) Visualization of 2D navigation toy example. The orange
dots represent the mode for following a clockwise path around
the circle and the red dots represent another mode for following
a counter-clockwise path. The green dots represent the multimodal region where multiple diverging paths exist. The blue region
indicates out-of-distribution. (b) Comparison of action standard
deviation and diffusion loss for different regions across 100 runs in
the 2D navigation example. The left bar plot displays the standard
deviation of action across policies for in-distribution uni-modal (ID,
UM), in-distribution multi-modal (ID, MM), and out-of-distribution
(OOD) regions. The right bar plot shows the corresponding diffusion loss for these regions.

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Interactive Imitation Learning
The goal of imitation learning is to train a policy from
an offline dataset through supervised learning. However,
this approach suffers from a fundamental issue when the

The most widely used method for estimating action uncertainty is to use an ensemble of policies bootstrapped on a
subset of the training data and using the level of disagreement
among the policies output to estimate uncertainty [6–8].
However, the ensemble method for uncertainty estimation
can be problematic in practice, especially when the task
allows multiple modes of completion. Specifically, they are
prone to either mistaking in-distribution multi-modal data as
out-of-distribution data or vice versa. This is because expressive ensemble policies may disagree due to the presence
of multiple viable strategies where each policy is certain
about its generated plan, leading to high action variance.
Furthermore, if the policy generates an action sequence
instead of a single action, the uncertainty estimation may
explode due to divergence over time or lose accuracy if a
shorter horizon is used for calculating action variance.
Another uncertainty estimation method is to use a separately trained classifier to more explicitly detect OOD states
using failure states [11]. However, this requires significant efforts of collecting and labeling human-gated interventions as

training data. In [12], the auxiliary reconstruction loss from
the image observations is proposed to estimate uncertainty,
but this method may be susceptible to confounding variables
related to reconstruction complexity, potentially independent
of the current state’s in-distribution status.
In contrast to the existing robot-gated DAgger methods,
our approach handles complex data distribution by incorporating the loss function of diffusion policy into the decision
rule. This approach does not need multiple policies for
uncertainty estimation, reducing both training and inference
time while benefiting from using an expressive policy class.
C. Policy Learning and Classification with Diffusion Models
Diffusion models, originally proposed as generative models for images, have seen success in various decisionmaking tasks due to their ability to handle complex data
distributions. In robotics, these models have been used in
various aspects including reinforcement learning (RL) [13],
imitation learning [3], task planning and motion planning
[14]. Interestingly, diffusion models have also been shown
to be effective zero-shot classifiers for the data distributions they are trained on [15–17]. This dual functionality
of generative and discriminative capabilities enhances their
value in decision-making tasks. Especially, it aligns well
with a robot-gated DAgger framework, which requires both
generation and evaluation of robot plans to decide when
human intervention is necessary during task execution.
III. M ETHOD

where o is the observation sequence, a is the action sequence,
and ϵ is a noise vector from Gaussian distribution N (0, I).
The parameter αt is a time-dependent factor that modulates
the influence of the original data and the added noise during
the diffusion process, and t is the denoising timestep. The
loss function L(o, a, ϵ, t) calculates the mean squared error
between the prediction target f (ϵ, a, t), which depends on
the choice of prediction type, and the noise predicted by the
model fθ , given the noised data at time t [18].
C. Diff-DAgger
1) OOD Detection via Diffusion Loss: During robot rollout, the uncertainty of the current action plan is estimated using the diffusion policy’s loss value for the given observation
and the generated action. In order to establish a baseline, we
calculate the expected diffusion loss L for each data point
in the training dataset using equation 2.
L (o, a, π) = Eϵ∼N (0,I),t∼µ(1,T ) Lπ (o, a, ϵ, t)

(2)

For practical implementation, we select a batch size Nb to
sample both the noise and diffusion timesteps and compute
the average loss over the batch. Given a quantile threshold
α, we assume OOD if the diffusion loss of the generated
action using Eqn 2 exceeds the α-quantile of the expected
diffusion losses from the training data. Additionally, expert
supervision takes place only if K past states consecutively
violate the qauntile threshold α. It helps distinguish brief
fluctuations from persistent out-of-distribution cases, significantly reducing the rate of false positives.

A. Problem Statement
The goal of imitation learning is to collect a dataset
and train a robot policy to complete a set of tasks with
expert demonstrations. In the robot-gated DAgger scenario,
the robot autonomously queries for expert intervention. We
assume the expert is skilled in completing the task, which
is considered successful if the goal is reached within the
time limit. We assume access to success information. Our
objective is to design an efficient robot query system that
accurately predicts task failures, requesting expert intervention only when necessary.
B. Diffusion Policy
1) Action Diffusion: Diffusion Policy formulates action
generation as a DDPM [2], where Langevin dynamics iteratively denoises a Gaussian prior, N (0, I), to recover structured actions. This approach enables stable training, handles
multimodal action distributions, and has achieved state-ofthe-art results in behavior cloning for robot manipulation [3].
2) Loss Function: During training, Diffusion Policy samples a denoising timestep and a Gaussian noise vector to
corrupt the action sequence. Given the corrupted actions
and the original observation sequence, it predicts the target
objective and optimizes using the following loss function:
√
√
Lπ (o, a, ϵ, t) = ∥f (ϵ, a, t) − fθ (o, αt a + 1 − αt ϵ, t)∥2
(1)

Algorithm 1 Diff-DAgger
1: Require Initial expert dataset Dexp , time-limit TL , expert

policy πe , and thresholds α and K
2: Initialize diffusion policy πr by training on Dexp
3: for each trial do
4:
Train policy πr on dataset Dexp
5:
Set the threshold using Dexp and α
6:
control ← robot
7:
while task is not done do
8:
while control = expert and task is not done do
9:
ae ← πe (o)
▷ Expert provides action
10:
Take action ae
11:
Dexp ← Dexp ∪ (o, ae )
▷ Record state-action
12:
end while
13:
ar ← πr (o)
▷ Policy provides action
14:
loss ← L (o, ar , πr )
▷ Using Eq. 2
15:
if CDF(loss) > α for last K timesteps then
16:
control ← expert
▷ Expert takeover
17:
else
18:
Take action ar
19:
end if
20:
end while
21: end for

2) Data Aggregation and Policy Update: We now summarize the data aggregation and policy update procedures.
Diff-DAgger first initializes the policy πr by training it on
Ni initial expert demonstrations. During rollout, the robot
takes the actions in the environment until a high diffusion
loss is detected. When the robot query is made, experts

Pushing

Stacking (Sim)

Plugging

Loading

Stacking (Real)

Fig. 3: Overview of simulation and real-world tasks: stacking,
pushing, plugging, and loading.
#
Contact High
N
Obj C Rich
Prec

TL

Expert Type

Task Succ
Dur Rate

Type

Task

Sim

Stacking
Pushing
Plugging

2
1
2

3
1
3

False
True
False

False 250 Motion Planner
False 250
RL Agent
True 500 Motion Planner

60.3
65.7
147

Real

Stacking
Loading

2
2

3
3

False
True

False 600
True 600

174.2 1.00
210.5 1.00

Human
Human

1.00
0.93
0.98

TABLE I: Task and Expert Summary. # Obj: number of objects,
NC : number of cameras, Contact Rich: contact-richness, High Prec:
high-precision, TL : time limit in timesteps at 20 Hz in simulation
or 30 Hz in real world, Task Dur: average expert task duration in
simulation steps, Exp SR: expert success rate during intervention.

intervene from the current scene and complete the task. Upon
completion of the task by either the robot or the expert,
the task is initialized to a random initial configuration. If
the robot neither queries nor completes the task after a
time limit, automatic expert intervention takes place. After
every Nd expert intervention has been made, we perform a
policy update, which consists of policy training and threshold
setting. The policy training involves training the policy for a
fixed number of epochs using the previously collected expert
demonstration data, and threshold setting involves setting the
base values by iterating through the training dataset to set
the OOD violation threshold used for robot-query trigger.
The full pseudo-code is available in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENT
We address the following three research questions to
understand the effectiveness of Diff-DAgger.
RQ1 Can diffusion loss predict task failure (Section IV-B)?
RQ2 Given a fixed number of expert interventions, can DiffDAgger outperform existing methods (Section IV-C)?
RQ3 Can Diff-DAgger reduce the wall-clock time of DAgger iterations (Section IV-D)?
A. Experiment Setup
1) Tasks and Experts: We test Diff-DAgger in the simulated and real robot environments. We include three tasks
in simulation—stacking, pushing, and plugging—using the
ManiSkill environment [19] and two tasks—stacking and
loading—in real world. In the stacking task, the robot picks

up a red cube and places it on a green cube, evaluating its
basic perception and manipulation skills. The pushing task
requires using an end-effector stick to move a red tee to
a predefined position, requiring multimodal planning and
control of contact dynamics. The plugging task involves
inserting a charger into a receptacle, testing fine manipulation
and alignment accuracy. Lastly, the loading task requires the
robot to pick up the soft bread and precisely load in onto
a toaster, assessing the robot’s ability to handle deformable
objects with precision.
For simulation tasks, we design experts as either multimodal or long-horizon planners to evaluate different expert
types. Specifically, we use RL agents and motion planners as
the experts: the motion planner, is a long-horizon planner that
generates actions based on future goals, whereas multiple
RL agents with different reward functions provide different
modes for task completion. For stacking and plugging tasks,
we use a rule-based RRT motion planner to simulate the
expert [20]. For pushing, two experts are trained using PPO
[21] with varying rewards: in addition to task-related reward,
one agent is additionally rewarded for rotating the object
clockwise direction, whereas other agent is rewarded for
rotating counter-clockwise. During interactive learning, the
agents alternate in providing demonstrations. We additionally
compare learning from the counter-clockwise agent only.
For real-world tasks, a proficient human expert teleoperated
the robot using a VR controller. The tasks and experts are
summarized in Table I.
For the task setup, we use three cameras—left view, right
view, and in-hand view—for pick-and-place tasks to mitigate
visual occlusion, while a single top-down camera is used
for the pushing task. In real-world experiments, we use a
Franka Research 3 robot and use three RealSense D435
cameras, capturing 720p RGB images at 30 FPS, which is
then downsampled to 256p at 15 FPS.
2) Baselines: We compare Diff-DAgger to the following
algorithms: Behavior Cloning, which uses the offline human
demonstration data as the training data; Ensemble-DAgger,
which uses five policies to calculate action variance for uncertainty estimation; and ThriftyDAgger [7], a SOTA robotgated DAgger algorithm which incorporates risk measure
into the decision rule using an offline RL algorithm. All
methods use the diffusion policy with the same model architecture to ensure consistent expressiveness across methods.
3) Model Learning: We adopt a model architecture similar to [22], utilizing a U-Net [22] policy head with FiLM
conditioning [23]. We test both state-based and image-based
data: For the state-based case, we use the internal robot
proprioception data (robot joint position and end-effector
pose) and the ground-truth pose of the external objects as
the input. For the image-based case, we apply random crop
augmentation following [24] and extract the embedding vector using an R3M ResNet18 encoder [25]. Instead of average
pooling, we apply spatial softmax [26] to the extracted
features before concatenating them with proprioception data.
Additionally, the observation horizon is set to one to reduce
the amount of data processed in each batch. All approaches

use position-based control, using either joint position control
or end-effector pose control, with either absolute or relative
action representations [27]. For end-effector pose control, a
6D representation for the orientation is used [28].
B. Predictability of Robot Query on Task Failure
The effectiveness of a robot query system depends on
its ability to respond to a failing episode. To quantitatively
assess this, we evaluate it in simulation, where task outcomes
can be efficiently recorded without the need for real-world
rollouts. Specifically, we construct a confusion matrix between the robot’s query decisions and task outcomes: For
each task, we train the robot policy on a fixed number of
expert demonstrations to roughly match 50% success rate and
evaluate for 100 randomly initialized episodes. We record
task completion without expert intervention and whether the
policy estimates high uncertainty during each episode, as
described in Section III-C. For each task, all methods use
the same set of thresholds, including α and K, as shown in
Table IV.
The results show that Diff-DAgger achieves a significant
improvement over Ensemble-DAgger and Thrifty-DAgger in
terms of its ability to predict task failure: Compared to
Ensemble-DAgger, Diff-DAgger achieves 42.7% higher F1
and 38.4% greater accuracy scores on average across the
simulated visuomotor tasks. Compared to Thrifty-DAgger,
Diff-DAgger improves F1 scores by 22.6% and accuracy by
32.8%. The results across tasks are shown in Table II.
C. Task Performance
We evaluate the policy performance of methods for statebased and image-based observations. Diff-DAgger method
consistently outperforms the baselines in task completion rate
across tasks, assuming the same number of expert demonstrations is given. On average, Diff-DAgger achieves a 13.7%
improvement over the second-best method in state-based
tasks. In visuomotor tasks, including the real-world tasks,
Diff-DAgger on average achieves a 25.2% improvement over
the other methods.
D. Wall-Clock Time for DAgger
Diff-DAgger also significantly reduces wall-clock time for
training, threshold setting and inference, in comparison to
the Ensemble-DAgger-based methods. Whereas EnsembleDAgger-based methods perform the ensemble action inference on the entire training data to set the numerical action
variance threshold, Diff-DAgger requires passing a single
batch per train data point to efficiently get the expected
diffusion losses. Additionally, Diff-DAgger uses a single
policy, reducing the wall clock time for both training and
inference by the factor of the number of policies used
for ensemble. Thrifty-DAgger extends Ensemble-DAgger by
estimating risk, requiring extra data collection using the robot
policy and additional risk estimator training, resulting in
longer wall-clock time across tasks.
We demonstrate the results on the visuomotor pushing
task, where Diff-DAgger reduced training time by a factor of 5.1, threshold setting time by a factor of 48, and

Method
Ours

0.88

0.77

0.83

0.84

Stacking

30

Ensemble-DA

0.81

0.31

0.52

0.59

Thrifty-DA

0.95

0.21

0.54

0.65

Ours

0.83

0.92

0.88

0.85

Ensemble-DA

1.00

0.11

0.60

0.73

Thrifty-DA

1.00

0.02

0.57

0.72

40

Pushing
25/25
(2 Experts)

Plugging

100

TNR

Acc ↑

ND

Pushing
(1 Expert)

TPR

F1 ↑

Task

Ours

1.00

0.52

0.77

0.82

Ensemble-DA

0.29

0.90

0.58

0.42

Thrifty-DA

0.58

0.66

0.62

0.62

Ours

0.68

0.82

0.75

0.73

Ensemble-DA

0.22

0.27

0.14

0.37

Thrifty-DA

0.26

0.31

0.22

0.21

TABLE II: Comparison of robot query decisions (query or no
query) against task outcomes (success or failure) in 100 policy
rollouts for visuomotor tasks. Here, True Positive Rate (TPR) refers
to the proportion of queries made to failing episodes, while True
Negative Rate (TNR) refers to the proportion of non-queries made
to successful episodes. ND is the number of expert demonstrations
used for training the policy.
Stacking
(Sim)

Pushing
Pushing
(1 Expert) (2 Experts)

Plugging

Stacking
Loading
(Real)

State Image State Image State Image State Image Image
BC
0.89
Ensemble-DA 0.72
Thrifty-DA
0.79
Ours
0.94

0.85
0.83
0.86
0.94

0.89
0.87
0.85
0.96

0.72
0.81
0.81
0.87

0.74
0.70
0.69
0.87

0.71
0.59
0.68
0.79

0.75
0.69
0.65
0.92

0.49
0.37
0.47
0.84

0.6
0.8

Image
0.8
0.95

TABLE III: Performance comparison across different tasks with
state-based and image-based observations in simulation or realworld. We report success rates after the final DAgger iteration, using
100 evaluation episodes for simulation tasks and 20 for real-world
tasks. For each task, the number of expert demonstrations is fixed
(detailed in Table IV) across methods. Our results show that DiffDAgger consistently outperforms the other methods given the same
number of demonstrations from the expert.
Task

Action To Tp Ta PredTg Td Ni Nf Nd α K Nb

Stacking (Sim)
Abs Pose 1 32 8
Pushing (1 Expert) Rel Joint 1 32 2
Pushing (2 Experts) Rel Joint 1 32 2
Plugging
Abs Pose 1 64 8
Stacking (Real)
Loading

V-obj
V-obj
V-obj
V-obj

16 20 60
16 20 100
16 20 100
64 20 100

4
4
4
8

0.99 2
0.99 1
0.9 2
0.99 2

512
512
512
512

Abs Pose 1 32 8 V-obj 16 40 120 20 0.99 2 512
Abs Pose 1 64 8 V-obj 64 40 120 20 0.99 2 512

TABLE IV: Hyperparameters for Diffusion Policy and DAgger.
Action: action space, To : observation horizon, Tp : prediction horizon, Ta : rollout horizon, PredTg: prediction target when training
diffusion policy, Td : number of diffusion timesteps for training and
inference, Ni : number of initial expert demonstrations, Nf : final
number of expert demonstrations, Nd : number of expert intervention
after each training session, K: patience for violation, Nb : DiffDAgger specific batch size for calculating the diffusion loss.

inference time by a factor of 3.8 compared to EnsembleDAgger, as shown in Fig 2. The overall reduction in average
policy update time is by a factor of 7.8, reducing the total
time to just 0.54 hours. Thrifty-DAgger requires additional
data collection and training for risk estimation, and DiffDAgger achieves corresponding reduction factors for train-

DiffDAgger

Fig. 4: Average duration for training, threshold setting, inference,
and total iteration for different methods, when training the final
DAgger iteration of visuomotor policy for pushing task. A single
A100 40 GB GPU is used for both training and inference.

ing, threshold setting, and inference times of 6.4, 53, and
3.9, respectively.
E. Discussions
False positives and false negatives reported in Table II
have distinct implications: a false positive means the robot
unnecessarily asks for expert demonstration, simply losing
the benefits of interactive learning and resembling offline
imitation learning. In contrast, a false negative, where the
robot overestimates its ability and fails, is more detrimental,
as it can cause the robot to deviate significantly from the
relevant states. Both Ensemble-DAgger and Thrifty-DAgger
incur a high rate of false negative in most tasks, especially
when learning from two pushing experts. This is likely
because the action variance present in the training dataset
is high due to diverging plans (clockwise paths and counterclockwise paths) given the same state, resulting in the policies’ insensitivity toward true OOD data. And we speculate
that this is the reason they perform worse than behavior
cloning in many tasks. On the other hand, Diff-DAgger yields
far fewer false negatives than other methods across tasks,
making it a more suitable choice for an interactive learning
framework with a complex data distribution. The sensitivity
to task failure is visualized in Fig 5, where we show robot
query behavior from each DAgger method. For instance,
Diff-DAgger proactively requests expert intervention once
the robots start to lose grip of the charger, while the other
methods fail to detect this issue—resulting in either dropping
the object or getting stuck in one motion.
It has been observed that the prediction type used for the
diffusion model during training can have significant impact
on both the convergence rate and the policy performance
[29]. We find that sample prediction and V-objective prediction converges faster than epsilon and report the results using
V-objective across the tasks as it works well considering both
convergence rate and policy performance.
We also observe an interesting emergent behavior from
policies trained on Diff-DAgger collected data: recovery
behavior. As shown in Fig 6, after the policy fails at its
initial attempt to stack the cube, it subsequently tries again
and completes the task. This type of behavior is not typically
observed unless carefully curated during data collection for
offline behavior cloning.
V. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we present Diff-DAgger, an efficient robotgated DAgger method with diffusion policy. While Diff-

ThriftyDAgger

EnsembleDAgger

Fig. 5: Robot query modes for different methods in the plugging
task. Black boxes indicate policy rollout, red boxes represent
robot queries, green boxes are expert interventions, and the purple
box marks an automatic expert intervention due to timeout. In
Diff-DAgger (Top), the robot promptly queries the expert when
the charger slips at 9.1s, leading to a successful episode with
expert help. In Thrifty-DAgger (Middle), the robot continues to try
plugging in despite slipping, eventually querying for intervention
after dropping it at 14.7s. In Ensemble-DAgger (Bottom), the
robot fails to query despite not progressing, and times out at 25.0s
to trigger automatic expert intervention. Expert interventions for
Thrifty-DAgger and Ensemble-DAgger are omitted due to space.

Robot misaligns
the cube.

Robot fails
its 1st attempt.

Robot makes a
2nd attempt.

Robot correctly
stacks the cube.

Fig. 6: Emergent behavior of DAgger-trained policy for stacking.
We observed an interesting new behavior with Diff-DAgger trained
policies: the recovery behavior after initial failure. This explains the
improvement in policy performance over policies trained using the
offline approach.

DAgger shows improvements in task failure prediction, policy performance, and wall-clock time for learning over other
methods, there are limitations: Whereas we dramatically
reduce the wall-clock time for DAgger iteration, using an
expressive policy class such as diffusion policy comes at the
cost of increased training time in general. In addition, most
of the choices we made to accelerate policy training is a
trade-off between the policy performance, and we hope to
address this in the future. We hope that this work paves a
way to open up more discussion for incorporating expressive
policies into interactive learning frameworks in anticipation
that computing will become faster over time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded and supported by Delta Electronics
Inc. We acknowledge Research Computing at the University
of Virginia for providing the computational resources and
technical support.

R EFERENCES
[1] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Learning
Fine-Grained Bimanual Manipulation with Low-Cost
Hardware,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems, July 2023.
[2] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
[3] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” in Proceedings of
Robotics: Science and Systems, July 2023.
[4] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction
of imitation learning and structured prediction to noregret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth
international conference on artificial intelligence and
statistics. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635.
[5] R. Hoque, L. Y. Chen, S. Sharma, K. Dharmarajan,
B. Thananjeyan, P. Abbeel, and K. Goldberg, “Fleetdagger: Interactive robot fleet learning with scalable
human supervision,” in Conference on Robot Learning,
2023, pp. 368–380.
[6] K. Menda, K. Driggs-Campbell, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Ensembledagger: A bayesian approach to safe
imitation learning,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 5041–5048.
[7] R. Hoque, A. Balakrishna, E. Novoseller, A. Wilcox,
D. S. Brown, and K. Goldberg, “ThriftyDAgger:
Budget-aware novelty and risk gating for interactive
imitation learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning,
2021.
[8] S. Dass, K. Pertsch, H. Zhang, Y. Lee, J. J. Lim,
and S. Nikolaidis, “Pato: Policy assisted teleoperation
for scalable robot data collection,” in Proceedings of
Robotics: Science and Systems, 2023.
[9] S. Ross and D. Bagnell, “Efficient reductions for
imitation learning,” in Proceedings of the thirteenth
international conference on artificial intelligence and
statistics. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010, pp. 661–668.
[10] M. Kelly, C. Sidrane, K. Driggs-Campbell, and
M. J. Kochenderfer, “HG-DAgger: Interactive imitation learning with human experts,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 8077–8083.
[11] H. Liu, S. Dass, R. Martı́n-Martı́n, and Y. Zhu, “Modelbased runtime monitoring with interactive imitation
learning,” in International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2023.
[12] J. Wong, A. Tung, A. Kurenkov, A. Mandlekar, L. FeiFei, S. Savarese, and R. Martı́n-Martı́n, “Error-aware
imitation learning from teleoperation data for mobile
manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning, 2022,
pp. 1367–1378.

[13] S. E. Ada, E. Oztop, and E. Ugur, “Diffusion policies
for out-of-distribution generalization in offline reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2024.
[14] J. Carvalho, A. T. Le, M. Baierl, D. Koert, and J. Peters,
“Motion planning diffusion: Learning and planning of
robot motions with diffusion models,” in IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1916–1923.
[15] A. C. Li, M. Prabhudesai, S. Duggal, E. Brown, and
D. Pathak, “Your diffusion model is secretly a zeroshot classifier,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp.
2206–2217.
[16] S. Zhou, Y. Du, S. Zhang, M. Xu, Y. Shen, W. Xiao, D.Y. Yeung, and C. Gan, “Adaptive online replanning with
diffusion models,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[17] B. Wang, G. Wu, T. Pang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Yin,
“Diffail: Diffusion adversarial imitation learning,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 14, 2024, pp. 15 447–15 455.
[18] T. Salimans and J. Ho, “Progressive distillation for fast
sampling of diffusion models,” 2022.
[19] S. Tao, F. Xiang, A. Shukla, Y. Qin, X. Hinrichsen,
X. Yuan, C. Bao, X. Lin, Y. Liu, T. kai Chan, Y. Gao,
X. Li, T. Mu, N. Xiao, A. Gurha, Z. Huang, R. Calandra, R. Chen, S. Luo, and H. Su, “Maniskill3: Gpu parallelized robotics simulation and rendering for generalizable embodied ai,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00425,
2024.
[20] J. J. Kuffner and S. M. LaValle, “Rrt-connect: An efficient approach to single-query path planning,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 995–1001.
[21] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and
O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[22] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical image computing and computerassisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international
conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18. Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[23] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and
A. Courville, “Film: Visual reasoning with a general
conditioning layer,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
[24] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang,
R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu, and
R. Martı́n-Martı́n, “What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation,”
2021.
[25] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and
A. Gupta, “R3M: A universal visual representation for
robot manipulation,” 2022.
[26] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-

end training of deep visuomotor policies,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 39, pp. 1–40,
2016.
[27] C. Chi, Z. Xu, C. Pan, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel,
S. Feng, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Universal manipulation interface: In-the-wild robot teaching without inthe-wild robots,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science
and Systems (RSS), 2024.
[28] Y. Zhou, C. Barnes, J. Lu, J. Yang, and H. Li, “On
the continuity of rotation representations in neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp.
5745–5753.
[29] Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and
H. Xu, “3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations,” in
Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
2024.

