Confidence Calibration in Vision-Language-Action Models
Thomas Zollo

TPZ 2105@ COLUMBIA . EDU

Columbia University

Richard Zemel

ZEMEL @ CS . COLUMBIA . EDU

arXiv:2507.17383v2 [cs.RO] 22 Dec 2025

Columbia University

Abstract
Trustworthy robot behavior requires not only high levels of task success but also that the robot
can reliably quantify how likely it is to succeed. To this end, we present a first-of-its-kind study
of confidence calibration in vision-language-action (VLA) foundation models, which map visual
observations and natural language instructions to low-level robot motor commands. We establish
a confidence baseline for VLAs, examine how task success relates to calibration error and how
calibration evolves over time, and introduce two lightweight techniques to remedy the miscalibration
we observe: prompt ensembles and action-wise Platt scaling. Our aim in this study is to begin to
develop the tools and conceptual understanding necessary to render VLAs both highly performant
and highly trustworthy via reliable uncertainty quantification.

1. Introduction
Confidence calibration, or the degree to which a model’s predicted probabilities reflect the true
likelihood of its predictions being correct, is a cornerstone of reliable machine learning systems
(Guo et al., 2017). When a model is well-calibrated, downstream decision-makers (e.g., humans,
planning algorithms, or safety monitors) can trust that a confidence estimate of 95% implies that
the predicted outcome will occur roughly 95% of the time (see Figure 1). Mismatches between
confidence and actual outcomes can have severe negative consequences in high-stakes settings such
as medical diagnosis or autonomous driving, motivating a rich literature on improving calibration in
deep learning models (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Kadavath et al., 2022; Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017; Lin et al., 2024; Minderer et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2023).
Recently, the field of robotics has embraced a new class of vision-language-action (VLA)
foundation models (Black et al., 2024, 2025; Kim et al., 2025; Zitkovich et al., 2023). Leveraging
large-scale, multistage pretraining, these models translate visual observations and natural language
instructions into low-level joint-space commands, unifying multimodal perception with motor control.
Although still a relatively new paradigm, current VLA systems already demonstrate previously
unattainable generalization across environments, tasks, and robot embodiments. Because these
models encode broad semantic and visuomotor priors from large-scale pretraining, they can be

1

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

VLA
Model

Action Prediction
Conﬁdence: 95%

?
Pick the wine glass and
place it in the cabinet.

Trial Results:
✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅
✅✅✅✅✅✅ ✖ ✅✅✅

Figure 1: To be trustworthy, a robotic system must be able to reliably express its confidence in its
ability to perform a task, especially in high-stakes and open-world domains. A well-calibrated robot
policy produces confidence estimates that align with its probability of task success. For example, the
robot should succeed on 95% of instances for which it expresses 95% confidence.
efficiently fine-tuned to new robots and downstream tasks, yielding large gains over training from
scratch.
Since VLAs are designed for closed-loop interaction with the physical world, knowing when and
how strongly to trust their actions is critical. For example, consider a robot performing a task in a
safety-critical environment, or attempting to manipulate a valuable, fragile object. In these scenarios,
if the policy can accurately express uncertainty, then costly or dangerous accidents can be avoided,
such as by refining the instruction or deferring the task to a human. Despite the importance of
calibrated confidence, basic questions remain largely unaddressed, e.g., whether VLAs are calibrated,
how calibration evolves over the task horizon, and how it can be improved.
Contributions. To bridge this gap, we present (to our knowledge) the first study of calibration in
VLAs, identifying key open questions and introducing practical remedies for miscalibration. Our
contributions include:
1. Benchmarking task success vs. calibration. We evaluate the relationship between task
success and calibration error across multiple benchmarks and VLA variants, finding that
the model architecture and training objective may play significant roles in determining this
relationship.
2. Prompt ensembles. We propose a lightweight, Bayesian-style method that averages a VLA’s
confidence across multiple semantically equivalent rephrasings of an instruction. This approach
consistently improves calibration, cutting expected calibration error by more than 20% on
average.
3. Calibration over task time. We analyze calibration over task time, showing that confidence is
often most reliable after making some task progress, suggesting natural points for risk-aware
intervention.
4. Action-wise scaling. We discover systematic over-/under-confidence in different action
dimensions and propose a method to recalibrate each action dimension independently to
produce more reliable confidence estimates.
2

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Our aim in this study is to begin to develop the tools and conceptual understanding necessary
to render VLAs not only highly performant but also highly trustworthy via reliable uncertainty
quantification.

2. Related Work
2.1. Confidence Calibration
A model is considered well-calibrated when the confidence (i.e., probability) it assigns to an outcome
matches the long-run frequency of that outcome. Deviation from this condition is often quantified via
expected calibration error (ECE) (Guo et al., 2017), which is approximated by grouping predictions
with similar confidence into bins and measuring the absolute difference between confidence and
accuracy in each bin. Beyond ECE, other metrics such as maximum calibration error (Guo et al.,
2017), Brier score (Brier, 1950), and negative log-likelihood (NLL) are used to capture related
and complementary notions of miscalibration. Despite their impressive accuracy and trends toward
better calibration, modern neural networks still display some persistent miscalibration (Minderer
et al., 2021), especially when the task distribution does not match the training distribution (Ovadia
et al., 2019). Consequently, a rich toolbox of post hoc fixes has emerged: Platt scaling (Platt, 1999),
temperature scaling (Guo et al., 2017), histogram binning (Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001), and other
recalibration methods (Kumar et al., 2019; Naeini et al., 2015; Zollo et al., 2024) can be applied to
an already trained model to reduce calibration error without altering its decision rule. Other popular
methods to improve calibration of neural networks include dropout (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016) and
ensembling (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
2.2. Vision-Language-Action Models
Vision-Language-Action models take visual data and natural language instructions as input and output
robot actions (Black et al., 2024, 2025; Kim et al., 2025; Zitkovich et al., 2023). They are typically
initialized from a visually-conditioned language model (VLM) that, in turn, is initialized from a
pretrained large language model (LLM). This allows VLAs to leverage rich multimodal priors to
integrate perception and action generation into a single end-to-end pipeline. While some VLAs
retain the token-based output paradigm inherited from these base models (Kim et al., 2025; Zitkovich
et al., 2023), others have augmented the architecture with, e.g., flow matching action experts for
smooth, high-frequency control (Black et al., 2024, 2025). These systems already perform complex,
language-specified tasks across diverse environments and robot embodiments. However, they lack a
reliable mechanism for quantifying the uncertainty of their chosen action sequences.
2.3. Calibration in LLMs
Given that most state-of-the-art VLAs are built on LLM backbones, it is natural to consider how
our work relates to existing studies of calibration in LLMs, an area that has received considerable
attention recently. Typical approaches to generating confidence estimates with LLMs include
expressing calibration as a multiple-choice question for the LLM (Kadavath et al., 2022), directly
verbalizing confidence with the model’s text output (Band et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2022; Tian et al.,
3

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

2023), or measuring semantic consistency across many sampled outputs for the same query (Chen
et al., 2024; Duan et al., 2024; Kuhn et al., 2023). However, it is difficult to adapt these methods
to the VLA setting. For example, while LLMs may produce the entire sequence before measuring
confidence, in robotics potential failures must be flagged much earlier in the trajectory to ensure
safety and avoid costly accidents. Also, sampling multiple full trajectories in the physical world may
be impossible. Finally, current VLAs lack the flexible and robust text-to-text interface of LLMs,
and thus cannot be expected to, e.g., answer natural language questions about their confidence in an
action prediction.
2.4. Uncertainty Quantification in Robotics
Uncertainty quantification has long been a focus in robotics, particularly through the lens of probabilistic robotics (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011; Thrun et al., 2005). Recent work explores the use
of model ensembles in control systems, examining how disagreements among multiple models can
capture uncertainty and guide more cautious policy updates and actions (Ataei and Dhiman, 2024;
Chua et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2019). Other advances include uncertainty-based active exploration
(Wang et al., 2024) and the application of conformal methods, which can provide distribution-free
guarantees for planning or classification pipelines (Ren et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023). How to obtain
calibrated, task-level uncertainty estimates given the expressive, multimodal perception and control
abilities of VLAs remains an open and safety-critical problem.

3. Calibration in Vision-Language-Action Models
In this section, we formalize the problem of confidence calibration for vision-language-action models.
We define calibration, describe a typical example of how contemporary VLA architectures generate
actions and how to extract a corresponding confidence estimate, and introduce the standard calibration
metrics used in our empirical study (see Figure 2 for a visual summary of this material). Finally, we
present two lightweight remedies for the miscalibration we observe in practice: prompt ensembles
and action-wise Platt scaling.
3.1. Calibration
Let C ∈ [0, 1] denote the confidence reported by a robot policy and Y ∈ {0, 1} the binary indicator of
task success (we use uppercase C, Y for random variables and lowercase c, y for their realizations).
A perfectly calibrated predictor satisfies
P(Y = 1 | C = c) = c,

∀ c ∈ [0, 1].

(1)

If this condition is met, then for the subset of trials on which the robot reports 80% confidence, we
should observe successful completion 80% of the time.
3.2. Vision-Language-Action Models
At task timestep t, a VLA policy πθ has access to the observed history ot = (v≤t , l≤t , a<t ), where
v is a visual observation, l is the (possibly fixed) natural language instruction, and a is an action.
4

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Pick the wine
glass and place
it in the cabinet.

Conﬁdence: 91.1%

Recalibration
VLA Model

Recalibration: Learned map
from uncalibrated conﬁdence
estimates to calibrated ones
(e.g., Platt scaling).

Conﬁdence: 95%
a1

a2

a3

a4

a5

a6

a7

0.91

0.95

0.99

0.84

0.92

0.79

0.98

Average

Trial Results

Calibration Error: Measures
diﬀerences b/w conﬁdence
estimates and success rates.

✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅
✅✅✅✅✅✅✅✅ ✖ ✅

Conﬁdence: 91.1%

Figure 2: Given an input image and text instruction, popular VLAs such as OpenVLA and RT-2
generate a distribution over discrete action tokens for each of the robot’s degrees of freedom.
Confidence in each dimension’s prediction can be estimated using the probability assigned to the
predicted token; a single estimate can be produced by averaging across dimensions. Given an
uncalibrated confidence estimate, recalibration methods such as Platt scaling use a small calibration
dataset to learn a map from uncalibrated confidence estimates to calibrated ones. Calibration error
can be measured by comparing confidence estimates to actual task success rates.
The policy induces a distribution over the next action πθ (a | ot ). When performing a task, the
policy executes the most likely action a⋆t = argmaxa πθ (a | ot ). Given the need for calibration, we
must extract a scalar confidence score ct from the model. We will interpret ct as an estimate of the
probability that the task will ultimately succeed given the observation history and the chosen action,
i.e., P(Y = 1 | ot , a⋆t ).
Next, we propose a baseline method for extracting ct from a broad class of token-based VLAs.
However, our subsequent analysis treats ct as a black-box number, so the following sections apply
equally to token-based, diffusion-based, or other controllers, as long as they are able to emit such a
scalar.
3.3. Baseline Confidence Estimation
Many state-of-the-art VLAs, including OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2025) and RT-2 (Zitkovich et al.,
2023), represent an action with D discrete tokens, where each represents one dimension of the robot’s
(d)
action space. For each dimension d ∈ {1, . . . , D} the policy outputs logits zt and probabilities

(d)
(d) 
(d)
(d)
pt = softmax zt ,
pt,k = πθ At = k | ot
(2)
for action tokens k ∈ {1, . . . , K} in an action vocabulary of size K. At time t, the policy selects the
(d)
(d)
top tokens at = argmaxk pt,k for each action dimension d, and decodes them into a continuous
action for execution by the robot.
5

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Because VLAs with token-based decoders closely mirror LLMs, we can adopt the usual LLM
heuristic of using the probability of the token actually chosen as a confidence signal. For each action
dimension, we take the probability assigned to the selected token, and average these values:
D

ct =

1 X
(d)
max pt,k .
k
D

(3)

d=1

Averaging plays a role similar to length-normalization in LLMs (Kuhn et al., 2023), preventing
confidence from being unfairly reduced for robots with many degrees of freedom.
3.4. Measuring Calibration
Calibration metrics translate deviations from the condition in Equation (1) into quantitative measures of miscalibration. Given the difficulty of measuring such a condition (i.e., comparing two
distributions), we consider a range of metrics.
For what follows, let {(ci , yi )}N
i=1 denote the reported confidence and binary outcome for
each of N robot trials (episodes). Each trial i consists of timesteps t = 1, . . . , Ti with pertimestep confidences ci,t ; to obtain a single trial-level value ci we apply an aggregation function
i
h: ci = h({ci,t }Tt=1
). Possible choices include the confidence before the first action, the mean across
timesteps, or the min/max over the trajectory. The following measures are agnostic to choice of h; in
our experiments we use the pre-action confidence ci = ci,1 , reflecting the high-stakes open-world
robotics setting in which early risk assessment is particularly valuable.
Expected Calibration Error. One popular measure of miscalibration is expected calibration error
(ECE) (Fisch et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2017):

1/q
EC |P(Y = 1 | C) − C|q
.

ECEq =

(4)

Put simply, ECE measures the expected difference between confidence and accuracy over the robot’s
task data distribution. The parameter q is typically set to q ∈ {1, 2}, where ECE1 weights deviations
linearly and ECE2 penalizes larger errors.
Because we can observe only a finite sample of trial results, the conditional expectation in
Equation (4) cannot be directly measured. Instead, it is typically approximated with a binning-based
estimator. With results from N robot trials, we approximate the population ECE quantity in Equation
(4) by first ordering predictions according to confidence, and splitting them into M equal-sized bins
d q is given by
B1 , . . . , BM . Then, our empirical estimate ECE
dq =
ECE

M
X

|Bm |
q 1/q
,
acc(Bm ) − conf(Bm )
N
m=1

where
acc(Bm ) =

1 X
yi ,
|Bm |

conf(Bm ) =

i∈Bm

1 X
ci .
|Bm |
i∈Bm

We report both ECE1 and ECE2 in our experiments.
6

(5)

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Brier Score. Brier score (Brier, 1950) is a classic measure of the quality of probabilistic forecasting:
N

BS =

1 X
(ci − yi )2 .
N

(6)

i=1

Brier score is an example of a proper scoring rule (Gneiting and Raftery, 2007), meaning that it is
minimized only when the predicted distribution matches the true distribution for each example (as
opposed to ECE, where data is grouped by confidence level). Brier score rewards both reliability
(confidence matching success) and sharpness (predictions away from the population rate).
Negative Log-Likelihood. Another metric used to measure calibration (Guo et al., 2017) is negative
log-likelihood (NLL):
NLL = −

N

1 X
yi log ci + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ci ) ,
N

(7)

i=1

Also a proper scoring rule, NLL penalizes very confident failures much more heavily than Brier
score.
Complementary Roles of Metrics. Because each metric emphasizes a different facet of probabilistic quality, we report all three to obtain a detailed view of calibration performance. ECE focuses
on reliability, or the alignment between stated confidence and empirical success, but is indifferent to
how decisive those confidences are. A trivial predictor that outputs the base success rate on every
trial achieves zero ECE while offering almost no utility for decision-making; Brier score and NLL
would penalize this behavior. Conversely, since Y is binary and only observed once, both Brier
score and NLL implicitly discourage probabilistic predictions in the interior of [0, 1] when the goal
is to achieve a very low loss. However, such estimates may sometimes be appropriate, e.g., due to
randomness in the robot’s environment. Evaluating all three metrics together thus guards against
corner cases and ensures that improvements in controlled evaluations translate into more actionable
and reliable confidence estimates that are simultaneously calibrated, discriminative, and informative.
3.5. Prompt Ensembles
Similar to the VLMs from which they are derived (Zhou et al., 2024), semantically meaningless
lexical differences in instructions, e.g., “pick up the coffee cup” vs. “grab the mug”, might shift
visual attention, alter path planning, and thereby change the predictions and confidence scores emitted
by VLA models. Although such sensitivity can pose a challenge to reliable task execution, it also
creates an opportunity to employ an ensemble-based approach (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017)
to confidence estimation. Specifically, we can treat the particular wording of an instruction as a
latent random variable and marginalize over it via Bayesian model averaging. Such averaging over
rephrasings reduces variance in the final confidence estimate by canceling out the noise induced by
word choice. Implementing this idea as an algorithm, we can then:
1. Generate rephrasings. An auxiliary LLM produces r semantically equivalent prompts
(1)
(r)
Lalt = {lalt , . . . , lalt } (see Table 1 for examples).
7

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Instruction

Pick up the black bowl between the plate and the ramekin
and place it on the plate

Rephrasings

(1) Lift the black bowl located between the plate and the
ramekin and set it on the plate.
(2) Grasp the black bowl found between the plate and the
ramekin and move it to the plate.
(3) Take the black bowl positioned between the plate and
the ramekin and position it on the plate.

Table 1: Example of multiple paraphrases of a single VLA instruction (from our experiments with
LIBERO Spatial). The rephrasings carry the same meaning as the original instruction, enabling a
reprompting approach in which we ensemble over predictions conditioned on lexically different yet
semantically equivalent instructions.
(i)

2. Estimate confidence with each variant. Generating an action with lalt yields a confidence
(i)
ct via Equation (3).
3. Aggregate. The final estimate is the ensemble mean cens
= 1r
t

(i)
i=1 ct .

Pr

Conceptually, this prompt ensemble technique can play a similar role to full model ensembles
(Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) or inference-time dropout (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016). With
efficient batching on parallel hardware, this method can add little (i.e., roughly constant) wall-clock
latency in practice.
3.6. Action-Wise Scaling
A standard remedy for miscalibration in classification models is to gather a small validation set from
the task distribution and perform post hoc recalibration, learning a function that maps uncalibrated
confidence estimates to calibrated ones (Guo et al., 2017; Naeini et al., 2015; Platt, 1999; Zadrozny
and Elkan, 2001). Post hoc recalibrators are typically simple functions of the original score function
(e.g., logits) or confidence estimate.
One popular example of a post hoc recalibration method is Platt scaling (Kumar et al., 2019;
Platt, 1999). Given confidence outputs and binary outcomes {(ci , yi )}N
i=1 on a held-out validation
set, one fits an affine transform g(c) = σ(αc + β) that minimizes NLL,
Xh
i
yi log g(ci ) + (1 − yi ) log 1 − g(ci ) ,
min −
α,β

i

where σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x ). At inference, each ct is replaced with c̃t = g(ct ), with the goal of
aligning confidence with the probability of task success while leaving the model’s actions unchanged.
Unlike classification models that emit one predictive distribution per sample, many tokenbased VLAs output one predictive distribution per action dimension. Those dimensions can differ
8

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

dramatically, for example because gripper open/close appears in nearly 100% of demonstrations,
whereas “rotate wrist” is rarer. A single global transform therefore may not be able to correct all
dimensions simultaneously.
Action-Wise Platt Scaling. We propose to address this heterogeneity by fitting one affine transform
per dimension d:
D

1 X
(d)
c̃t =
σ αd max pt,k + βd ,
(8)
k
D
d=1

with parameters {αd , βd } learned on the same calibration set. Intuitively, αd scales dimension d,
flattening or sharpening its distribution, while βd shifts its overall optimism. As in standard Platt
(d)
scaling, the chosen tokens at remain unchanged; we only modify the reported confidence.
This dimension-wise perspective can be applied to other post hoc recalibrators as well, for
instance action-wise temperature scaling. Beyond the specific methodology, we aim to highlight
that VLA calibration will require domain-specific tools rather than a direct transplant of methods
designed for standard classifiers.

4. Experiments
Having described the problem of confidence calibration in vision-language-action models, we next
conduct an empirical investigation of the following questions:
1. How are task success and calibration error related, and what factors might play a role in this
relationship? (Section 4.2)
2. Can prompt ensembles consistently improve confidence estimates? (Section 4.3)
3. How does calibration evolve over the task time horizon, and what does this suggest for potential
monitoring systems? (Section 4.4)
4. Are action dimensions differentially calibrated, and what are the implications for recalibration?
(Section 4.5)
Our aim is to highlight key issues and lay the empirical groundwork for future research on calibrating
VLAs.1
4.1. Experiment Details
We perform our experiments using 4 different VLA variants: OpenVLA, MolmoAct (Lee et al.,
2025), UniVLA (Bu et al., 2025), and NORA (Hung et al., 2025). We choose these models because
they each predict tokens in a manner that allows for a natural probabilistic interpretation.2 All
models are fine-tuned on 4 different task suites from the LIBERO (Liu et al., 2023) benchmark:
Spatial, Object, Goal, and 10. LIBERO is a simulation environment for language-conditioned robot
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/thomaspzollo/vla_calibration.
2 Descriptions of confidence estimation with MolmoAct, UniVLA, and NORA are found in Appendix A.1.

9

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

manipulation tasks inspired by human activities (see Table 3 for task examples). We also include
results for the 8-bit and 4-bit quantized versions of OpenVLA fine-tuned on Spatial, Object, and
Goal, for a total of 22 model/task suite combinations.
Each task suite features 10 different tasks with 50 randomized initializations, for a total of 500
examples. For a given task suite, task success rate represents the proportion of the 500 trials that
result in success (while task error rate represents the proportion of trials that result in failure). To
calculate ECE, we use 12 equal-mass bins and the Python package released with Kumar et al. (2019).
Unless otherwise noted, we focus on confidence estimates produced at the first timestep, before
any action is taken. This aligns with the need for safety in open-world robot deployments, where
robots should signal uncertainty as early as possible in order to avoid costly or dangerous incidents.
In Section 4.4, we explore how calibration differs across timesteps over the task horizon.
4.2. Relationship Between Calibration and Task Success
Much of the early research on calibration in deep learning models was based on perceptions of how
task success (usually image classification accuracy) was related to calibration error. In particular,
influential work argued that modern neural networks are poorly calibrated (Guo et al., 2017),
suggesting that improved accuracy comes at the expense of calibration. This led researchers to
propose training interventions to augment the cross-entropy loss with other objectives seeking
improved calibration, potentially at a cost to overall accuracy (Kumar et al., 2018; Mukhoti et al.,
2020). However, subsequent research found that, in fact, more accurate networks are generally
better calibrated (and easier to recalibrate), and thus modifications to training procedures may not be
needed (Minderer et al., 2021). Instead, techniques such as post hoc recalibration (Guo et al., 2017;
Kumar et al., 2019; Zadrozny and Elkan, 2001) and ensembling (Fort and Lakshminarayanan, 2024;
Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), applied to models trained for high accuracy, are sufficient to achieve
low calibration error (although calibration under distribution shift remains a significant challenge
(Ovadia et al., 2019)).
To establish high-level direction for calibration research in VLAs, our first experiment focuses
on this important question of how task success relates to calibration error (according to ECE1 ,
ECE2 , Brier score, and NLL) across the 22 model/task suite combinations described above. Results
are visualized in Figure 3, and also reported in Table 6. All models exhibit a roughly monotonic
relationship between task error and the discriminative metrics (Brier score and NLL), but they differ
on ECE: OpenVLA and MolmoAct tend to achieve lower ECE when task error is low, whereas
UniVLA and NORA do not show as clean a trend. One possible explanation is that in OpenVLA
and MolmoAct, the cross-entropy loss (a proper scoring rule) more directly supervises discretized
action dimension tokens, so bin-averaged confidence better tracks per-task success. By contrast, the
latent or compressed action representations and auxiliary objectives in UniVLA and NORA may
introduce a more significant mismatch between token probabilities and success. These patterns are
only suggestive, but they point to architectural complexity in modern VLAs as a potential source of
unfavorable calibration behavior. Future work with controlled ablations is needed to fully understand
which design choices drive the observed behavior.

10

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 3: Visualization of task error rates compared against 4 different calibration error measurements
for 4 VLA variants (OpenVLA, MolmoAct, UniVLA, and NORA) and 4 LIBERO task suites (Spatial,
Object, Goal, 10), as well as OpenVLA 8- and 4-bit versions on Spatial, Object, and Goal. All models
exhibit a roughly monotonic relationship between task error and the discriminative measures (Brier
score and NLL). ECE shows differences between model families, potentially due to architecture and
objective differences.
4.3. Ensembling Confidence Across Prompts
We next study the empirical effectiveness of the prompt ensemble approach described in Section 3.5.
First, for the natural language instruction associated with each task, we create 20 rephrasings using
GPT-4o-mini (see Appendix Table 4 for the prompts used). During testing, we produce a confidence
estimate conditioned on each “reprompt”, and average over these confidence scores to obtain the
final model confidence. We evaluate OpenVLA and its quantized variants across 3 task suites, as
well as UniVLA and NORA on the Spatial suite. We measure ECE1 , ECE2 , Brier score, and NLL,
comparing to the baseline method for producing confidence estimates using the original instruction.
Detailed results are recorded in Table 2 (results for the 8-bit and 4-bit quantized models are
deferred to Appendix Table 7). Across all models and task suites, the Reprompt (prompt ensemble)
approach always decreases calibration error according to ECE1 , ECE2 , and NLL, and never performs
worse according to any of the metrics. Decreases in ECE can reach up to 40%, and average
reductions are roughly 20% (see Figure 7 for a visualization of percent changes across all metrics).
The improvement is larger for ECE than the proper scoring rules (Brier score and NLL), where
average miscalibration decreases are closer to 5-10%. This suggests that improvements in reliability
(i.e., confidence matching marginal success rates) are generally greater than those in sharpness,
which is expected from an ensemble technique targeted at reducing variance in confidence estimation.

11

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Model

Dataset

Method

ECE1

ECE2

Brier

NLL

OpenVLA

Spatial
Spatial
Object
Object
Goal
Goal

Baseline
Reprompt
Baseline
Reprompt
Baseline
Reprompt

0.088
0.052
0.060
0.036
0.151
0.115

0.106
0.068
0.073
0.053
0.170
0.132

0.150
0.145
0.108
0.105
0.207
0.197

0.533
0.477
0.401
0.361
0.707
0.620

UniVLA

Spatial
Spatial

Baseline
Reprompt

0.162
0.157

0.193
0.192

0.064
0.064

0.282
0.262

NORA

Spatial
Spatial

Baseline
Reprompt

0.099
0.092

0.115
0.112

0.105
0.105

0.386
0.376

Table 2: Calibration error measurements for 2 different methods of confidence estimation: (1)
baseline (average selected token probability); (2) Reprompt (ensembling over semantically equivalent prompts). Prompt ensembling consistently improves all measures, and never leads to worse
calibration.
Overall, given its lightweight nature and strong empirical effectiveness, such data augmentation
approaches seem like a promising direction for enhancing uncertainty quantification in VLAs.
To understand the robustness of these results, we perform multiple ablations; because of space
considerations, we defer full details and results to Appendix B.3. First, we consider the effect of
changing the prompt given to GPT-4o-mini for producing the 20 instruction rephrasings, finding
that improvements in calibration error from the Reprompt method are robust to different rephrasing
prompts. Second, we consider the effect of the number of prompts used in the prompt ensemble,
and see that the algorithm behaves favorably, where calibration error generally decreases as more
instructions are included in the ensemble.
4.4. Calibration Over Task Time
The previous experiments evaluate confidence before the first action is executed, a conservative choice
for safety-critical deployments. Yet many tasks might allow the robot to collect more information
without risk before having to express confidence. For instance, in the wine glass scenario of Figure 1,
the gripper can hover above the stem, refine its scene representation, and only then decide whether it
is confident enough to proceed. More context should, in principle, yield better calibration.
To test this intuition, we measure calibration across 500 test trials for 100 different levels of task
completion ({0, 1, . . . , 99}%), where task completion is calculated as the current timestep index t
divided by the total number of timesteps in the task episode (and multiplied by 100). Results for each
level of task completion are averaged across the 500 trials, to study whether high-level confidence
and calibration trends might occur. In this section, we focus on 6 model/task suite combinations
(OpenVLA and its 8-bit version, each applied to Spatial, Object, and Goal suites), to understand
12

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

how any observations might generalize. Our goal is to examine whether the quality of confidence
estimates changes as the robot progresses in its task. At each measured timestep, we compute ECE1
and Brier score using the baseline method for producing confidence estimates. Because a downstream
safety monitor might consider the history of recent estimates (beyond the current one), we evaluate
three aggregation rules for reporting a confidence estimate at each timestep:
1. Current - confidence from the current timestep only;
2. Window (5) - mean over the baseline confidence estimates from the current timestep and the
four immediately preceding ones;
3. Avg. All - mean over the baseline confidence estimates from all steps seen so far.
Beyond calibration error, we also visualize how average confidence estimates evolve over the
task horizon, separated by successful and failed trials. Finally, we plot reliability diagrams for the
timesteps corresponding to {0, 50, 75, 99}% completion. Reliability diagrams (Guo et al., 2017) offer
a visualization of expected calibration error, using a similar binning strategy. They show confidence
against accuracy for each bin, where a well-calibrated system lies on the x = y line. Results for the
Spatial task suite with the fine-tuned OpenVLA model are shown in Figure 4. Additional results
for Spatial with the Quant-8 model (Figure 10), as well as the Object and Goal suites with the full
precision (Figures 11, 13) and Quant-8 models (Figures 12, 14), are presented in Appendix B.4.
Focusing first on results using the confidence estimate from the current step, a clear pattern
emerges. As shown in Figure 4 and Figures 10-14, across all 6 settings and both metrics calibration
improves sharply from 0% to approximately 50% completion, then plateaus or deteriorates back
towards the original level (left-most and left-middle plots in section (a) of the results figures). Beyond
lower scores on calibration error, our additional plots characterize the improved probabilistic nature
of the confidence estimates towards the middle of the task horizon. In the right-middle and right-most
plots in the top section (a) (titled “Successful Trials” and “Failed Trials”), the gap between the
average confidence on successful vs. failed trials tends to be greatest around 50% task completion.
Additionally, considering the top row of reliability diagrams (section (b)), we can see that the
confidence estimates using the current step become far more reliable around this point: error for
many bins is large at the beginning, then the difference between confidence and accuracy for most
bins becomes smaller until the task is roughly 75% complete. Near task completion, the gap between
confidence on successful vs. failed trials closes again, and reliability suffers as a result. These results
suggest a practical recipe: let the robot execute a certified-safe prefix of the trajectory, and then assess
its confidence and intervene if necessary. Such horizon-aware monitoring balances safety (no contact
made during the prefix) with the improved reliability in confidence estimates that comes from extra
perceptual context.
We next observe the effects of other simple strategies for aggregating confidence estimates
across timesteps. As described above, alongside the current step confidence, we also consider a
sliding window average over 5 single-step estimates and the average of all observed single-step
estimates. Across all model/task suite combinations, the sliding window method is particularly
effective at improving the Brier score around the middle of the task horizon, although ECE is not
always improved. With respect to averaging all single-step estimates so far, we observe that Brier
score improves throughout the task, but ECE generally gets worse. The underlying behavior driving
13

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 4: Empirical study of calibration error across the task time horizon. In the top row (a), the
left two plots show how calibration evolves with task progress, while the right two plots show the
average confidence by task time, grouped by successful and failed trials. The bottom two rows
(b, c) offer a sample of the reliability diagrams produced by different methods for aggregating
confidence estimates across time. Overall, these results illustrate that calibration can improve as
the task progresses and more information is gathered, suggesting opportunities for context-aware
uncertainty interventions.
these changes can be observed in the bottom row of reliability diagrams (marked (c)): the “Avg. All”
method is successful at assigning relatively lower confidence to failed examples, but also reduces
variance in the estimates such that they are highly overconfident in these bins (i.e., for the leftmost
bin at 99% completion, confidence is still high, but accuracy is near zero). Thus, while this approach
fares poorly according to ECE, it is actually promising in the sense that it enables more effective
discrimination between successful and failed trials.
Finally, to further probe the generality of these results, we repeat these experiments using the
UniVLA model, presented in Appendix Figures 15, 16, and 17. We once again find that calibration
improves after making some task progress before deteriorating again, suggesting opportunities for
context- and risk-aware applications of confidence quantification.
4.4.1. Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF C ONTEXT-AWARE C ONFIDENCE M ONITORING
To illustrate how context-aware confidence monitoring could work in practice, we apply it to a
representative pick and place task from the Goal suite. The task is to “put the wine bottle on the
rack”, a case where the robot system should be relatively conservative to avoid breaking glass. We
consider a naive approach to context-aware monitoring, proposing to halt task performance when

14

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 5: Qualitative examples of a context-aware confidence monitoring strategy applied to a task
from the Goal suite. Here, the task is to “put the wine bottle on the rack”. The red dashed line
represents the 10% quantile of the confidence estimates output by the model across the task time
horizon, offering a potential threshold below which the robot may abstain from performing the task.
both: (1) the confidence level falls below a threshold set to the 10% quantile of confidence estimates
for that point in the task horizon across all task trials (based on percent completion); (2) the robot
is within a few inches of contacting an object, or already has contacted an object. Since building
a system to detect proximity to objects is beyond the scope of this work, we focus on a qualitative
demonstration of this idea. For each example under examination, we plot current confidence for
{0, 20, 40, 60, 80, 98}% completion, as well as the corresponding 10% quantile risk threshold and
an image of the robot environment at that time.
Some particularly illustrative examples are shown in Figure 5. First, we consider the episode
shown across the top row (marked (a), Episode 29 of the 50 in the Goal task suite). Here, confidence
begins high, but falls until it is slightly below the halting threshold at 20% task completion, coinciding
with the difficult subtask of gripping the rounded glass bottle. Allowed to continue, the model is able
to grip the bottle, and confidence rebounds as it approaches the wine rack. However, confidence
once again falls quickly when it begins to set the bottle down, possibly because the difficult grip
put the bottle in an unfavorable position for placement. In the end, the robot fails to place the bottle
securely on the rack, with potentially negative real-world consequences. Given the opportunity, a
safety intervention could have been performed at multiple points before this incident, either to avoid
grasping the bottle in the first place or to reset the bottle safely on the table instead of trying a failed
placement.
In both Episode 46 (marked (b)) and Episode 49 (marked (c)), confidence begins below the
threshold. However, given the knowledge that calibration improves throughout the task horizon,
we may prefer to allow the robot to proceed with the task as long as it is not too near any objects.
15

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Comparing these examples shows the potential of such an approach. In Episode 46, although
confidence increases throughout the beginning of the task, it dives sharply after 40% task completion
and remains low throughout the rest of the task, as the wine bottle is ultimately knocked down and
the model is unable to recover. Given our proposed strategy, the task might have been halted before
the wine bottle was contacted (at 40% completion), and could, for example, have been deferred to a
human. On the other hand, in Episode 49 confidence estimates remain above the threshold for the
rest of the trial, and the robot is successful. This episode also highlights the usefulness of an adaptive
confidence threshold, given that the confidence estimate at 98% task completion would have fallen
below the threshold at other timesteps.
More such qualitative examples are provided in Appendix Figure 18. These include both cases
where the strategy succeeds and others where it fails (e.g., in Episode 1 confidence falls below the
threshold while grasping in an ultimately successful trial).
4.5. Calibration Across Action Dimensions
Some token-based VLAs such as OpenVLA or MolmoAct decompose a low-level command into
tokens explicitly corresponding to their 7 different action dimensions. Our baseline confidence
estimate collapses this structure into a single scalar by averaging the top-token probabilities across
the dimensions; implicitly, this assumes that every dimension is calibrated to the same degree.
That assumption may not hold in practice: a gripper ‘open’ or ‘close’ token may appear in nearly
every demonstration, whereas a 90◦ wrist roll could be rare. Such dataset imbalances and other
implementation details might skew calibration across dimensions, and relevant algorithms, e.g., for
post hoc recalibration, might benefit from explicitly addressing this. To study this question, our final
experiment consists of two parts. (1) Per-dimension calibration audit. For each dimension d we
(d)
treat maxk pt,k as that dimension’s confidence and compute ECE1 , to examine whether different
degrees of freedom are differentially calibrated. (2) Targeted recalibration test. We compare classic
Platt scaling to the action-wise variant of Section 3.6, which learns independent scaling parameters
for each action dimension before averaging the transformed confidences across dimensions.
We perform our study using MolmoAct and all 3 OpenVLA variants (full, Quant-8, Quant-4)
fine-tuned on the Spatial and Goal task suites. Each experiment is run for 1000 trials, with random
20%/80% calibration-test splits. Given the reduced size of the test set, we measure calibration with
10 equal-mass bins (instead of 12 as in other experiments). Beyond traditional Platt scaling, we also
include a range of baselines: temperature scaling (Guo et al., 2017), histogram binning (Zadrozny and
Elkan, 2001), and Platt binning (Kumar et al., 2019). (Note: temperature scaling is excluded from
MolmoAct results, as the variable-length action encodings preclude a straightforward adaptation.)
Figure 6 shows results with the baseline estimates for the full precision OpenVLA and MolmoAct
models; Appendix Figure 19 includes the results with the quantized models.
Two key observations arise. First, ECE1 varies by up to 2 times across dimensions, with no
consistent best or worst dimensions across settings. It follows that a single scalar confidence
masks significant differences in dimension-wise confidence estimates. Second, we can observe that
replacing global Platt scaling with per-action-dimension transforms consistently lowers calibration
error (and also improves over the additional baselines). ECE is improved by over 20% in some cases,
without changing the selected tokens or adding meaningful runtime overhead. Together, these results

16

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 6: On the left of each pair of plots, we compare miscalibration across action dimensions. On
the right, we compare the performance of baselines to action-wise Platt scaling.
indicate that VLA calibration research should treat each degree of freedom as its own concern in
order to improve the effectiveness of relevant algorithmic tools. Dimension-aware post hoc methods
such as action-wise Platt scaling offer a simple yet effective path toward that goal. More broadly,
our findings underscore that calibrating VLAs introduces challenges not seen in other domains, so
meaningful progress will demand substantial domain-specific research rather than wholesale adoption
of understanding and techniques from other areas of deep learning.

5. Discussion
In this work, we set out to answer a simple but previously unexplored question: can existing VLA
models tell us, in a statistically reliable way, how likely they are to succeed? Our experiments
offer some preliminary answers. First, we find that average top-token probability is a reasonable
confidence baseline, and that decisions like architecture and learning objectives may affect the crucial
relationship between task performance and calibration error. Second, a zero-training algorithm using
an ensemble of rephrased natural language instructions reliably reduces expected calibration error
across 3 LIBERO suites and 3 VLA variants. This suggests that some miscalibration is simply
high-variance noise in the language channel, and highlights a direction for future work in more
reliable action prediction via input perturbation. Third, our results indicate that miscalibration is
not uniform across potential sources of confidence estimates. Instead, it varies over time and across
action dimensions, and adaptive post hoc fixes (e.g., time-horizon-aware monitoring and action-wise
Platt scaling) can exploit that structure. Together, our findings point towards some interesting initial
directions of study for VLA calibration: understanding how task accuracy and calibration co-evolve
across diverse modeling approaches and environments, creating calibration tools grounded in practical
VLA implementation details, incorporating temporal confidence dynamics, and developing rigorous
algorithms that exploit these structures for identifying and addressing uncertainty.

17

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

6. Limitations
All experiments in this work are conducted in simulation. This choice is common in robotics research
(e.g., Lillicrap et al. (2015); Schulman et al. (2017)), and enables the controlled resets and hundreds
of rollouts per task suite needed for stable calibration estimates. However, it limits domain diversity
and leaves open questions of how these results translate to real settings. Replicating the same
study on physical robot hardware would require thousands of physical executions, which can be
prohibitively time-consuming and expensive. Accordingly, simulation remains the most practical
testbed for calibration research in the near term, though it cannot fully capture sensor noise, latency,
wear-and-tear, and other physical factors that may influence confidence calibration in the real world.
Studying these questions and techniques on real robots will ultimately be essential for understanding
how these and other factors affect VLA calibration under realistic conditions.

7. Future Work
Several extensions follow naturally from our work. Confidence calibration should be benchmarked
across other environments, robot embodiments, and VLA architectures, including diffusion-based
planners, continuous regression heads, and flow-matching controllers. Establishing strong baselines for these architectures will likely require new confidence surrogates and post hoc adjustments.
Likewise, perturbation techniques besides instruction paraphrasing, e.g., inserting synthetic lighting changes or random visual distractors, could expose additional failure modes and inspire new
multimodal ensemble techniques. Running such experiments on real robots will be essential for
understanding how various physical factors affect VLA calibration in the real world. Uncertainty
estimation also holds the potential to guide efficient data gathering and fine-tuning, as in active learning (Wang et al., 2017). Further, while all of our experiments focused on fine-tuned in-distribution
settings, future work should consider these phenomena in the zero-shot and out-of-distribution
settings. Finally, our temporal analysis hints at a period mid-trajectory where confidence is most
trustworthy; integrating that signal into selective execution, planning, or human-in-the-loop systems
is an open challenge for designing adaptive risk-aware robotic pipelines.
Overall, we hope our work helps build a foundation for the research on VLA calibration needed
to make these models trustworthy components of real-world robotic systems.

18

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Acknowledgements
We thank Yunzhu Li and Yixuan Wang for the helpful discussions and feedback. We also thank ONR
Grant N00014-23-1-2436 for its generous support. This work is supported by the funds provided
by the National Science Foundation and by DoD OUSD (R&E) under Cooperative Agreement
PHY-2229929 (The NSF AI Institute for Artificial and Natural Intelligence).

References
Masoud Ataei and Vikas Dhiman. Dadee: Well-calibrated uncertainty quantification in neural
networks for barriers-based robot safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00616, 2024.
Neil Band, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Linguistic calibration of long-form
generations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai,
Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0 : A vision-language-action flow model for
general robot control. CoRR, 2024.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael
Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. π0.5 : a vision-language-action model with open-world
generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
Glenn W. Brier. Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly Weather Review,
78(1):1–3, 1950.
Qingwen Bu, Yanting Yang, Jisong Cai, Shenyuan Gao, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Ping Luo, and
Hongyang Li. Univla: Learning to act anywhere with task-centric latent actions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.06111, 2025.
Chao Chen, Kai Liu, Ze Chen, Yi Gu, Yue Wu, Mingyuan Tao, Zhihang Fu, and Jieping Ye. Inside:
Llms’ internal states retain the power of hallucination detection. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2018.
Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
search. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Jinhao Duan, Hao Cheng, Shiqi Wang, Alex Zavalny, Chenan Wang, Renjing Xu, Bhavya Kailkhura,
and Kaidi Xu. Shifting attention to relevance: Towards the predictive uncertainty quantification of
free-form large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Adam Fisch, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Calibrated selective classification. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.

19

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Stanislav Fort and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Ensemble everything everywhere: Multi-scale aggregation for adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05446, 2024.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
uncertainty in deep learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Chia-Yu Hung, Qi Sun, Pengfei Hong, Amir Zadeh, Chuan Li, U Tan, Navonil Majumder, Soujanya
Poria, et al. Nora: A small open-sourced generalist vision language action model for embodied
tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19854, 2025.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly)
know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, et al. Openvla: An open-source
vision-language-action model. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2025.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
Ananya Kumar, Percy S Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Verified uncertainty calibration. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Sunita Sarawagi, and Ujjwal Jain. Trainable calibration measures for neural networks
from kernel mean embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2017.
Jason Lee, Jiafei Duan, Haoquan Fang, Yuquan Deng, Shuo Liu, Boyang Li, Bohan Fang, Jieyu
Zhang, Yi Ru Wang, Sangho Lee, et al. Molmoact: Action reasoning models that can reason in
space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07917, 2025.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
words. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.

20

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Zhen Lin, Shubhendu Trivedi, and Jimeng Sun. Generating with confidence: Uncertainty quantification for black-box large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
2024.
Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero:
Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2023.
Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Jishnu Mukhoti, Viveka Kulharia, Amartya Sanyal, Stuart Golodetz, Philip Torr, and Puneet Dokania.
Calibrating deep neural networks using focal loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2020.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated
probabilities using bayesian binning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon, Balaji
Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating
predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2019.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
J. Platt. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized likelihood
methods. Advances in Large Margin Classifiers, 10(3), 1999.
Allen Z Ren, Anushri Dixit, Alexandra Bodrova, Sumeet Singh, Stephen Tu, Noah Brown, Pen Xu,
Leila Takayama Takayama, Fei Xia, Jake Varley, et al. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty
alignment for large language model planners. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Jiankai Sun, Yiqi Jiang, Jianing Qiu, Parth Nobel, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Mac Schwager.
Conformal prediction for uncertainty-aware planning with diffusion dynamics model. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox. Probabilistic robotics. MIT press, 2005.
Katherine Tian, Eric Mitchell, Allan Zhou, Archit Sharma, Rafael Rafailov, Huaxiu Yao, Chelsea
Finn, and Christopher D Manning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated
confidence scores from language models fine-tuned with human feedback. In The Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Keze Wang, Dongyu Zhang, Ya Li, Ruimao Zhang, and Liang Lin. Cost-effective active learning for
deep image classification. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 27
(12):2591–2600, December 2017.
21

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Xiyao Wang, Ruijie Zheng, Yanchao Sun, Ruonan Jia, Wichayaporn Wongkamjan, Huazhe Xu,
and Furong Huang. Coplanner: Plan to roll out conservatively but to explore optimistically for
model-based rl. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Obtaining calibrated probability estimates from decision trees
and naive bayesian classifiers. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2001.
Yiyang Zhou, Chenhang Cui, Jaehong Yoon, Linjun Zhang, Zhun Deng, Chelsea Finn, Mohit Bansal,
and Huaxiu Yao. Analyzing and mitigating object hallucination in large vision-language models.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart,
Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
Thomas P Zollo, Zhun Deng, Jake Snell, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Improving predictor
reliability with selective recalibration. In Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.

22

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Dataset

Example Image

Example Instruction

Spatial

Pick up the black bowl between the
plate and the ramekin and place it on
the plate.

Object

Pick up the alphabet soup and place it
in the basket.

Goal

Open the middle drawer of the cabinet.

10

Put both the alphabet soup and the
tomato sauce in the basket.

Table 3: Task examples from the LIBERO task suites: Spatial, Object, Goal, and 10.

Appendix
Appendix A. Additional Experiment Details
Task examples from the LIBERO task suites are shown in Table 3.
A.1. Confidence Estimation with VLA Variants
MolmoAct At each timestep, MolmoAct predicts a sequence of discrete action tokens for every
action dimension, with a softmax distribution over the 256 action bins for each token. For a given
action dimension, we take the probability assigned to the executed bin for each of its tokens and
average these probabilities to obtain a per-dimension confidence. This yields one scalar confidence
value per action dimension. We then average these per-dimension confidences across all action
dimensions to obtain a single scalar confidence for the action at that timestep.

23

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

UniVLA At each timestep, UniVLA predicts a fixed number (4) of discrete latent action tokens,
each chosen from a codebook of size 16. For each latent token, we take the softmax probability
assigned to the selected code as its token-level confidence. Because these latent tokens are jointly
decoded into all continuous control dimensions, the confidence scores do not correspond to particular action dimensions. Finally, we average these per-token confidences to obtain a single scalar
confidence for UniVLA at that timestep.
NORA At each timestep, NORA predicts an action chunk encoded as a sequence of discrete tokens,
each selected via a softmax over the augmented action vocabulary. For every token, we take the
softmax probability of the sampled token as its token-level confidence. Because the NORA tokenizer
mixes information from all control dimensions, we do not derive per-dimension confidences. Instead,
we compute a single scalar confidence for NORA by averaging these token-level confidences across
all tokens in the predicted action chunk for that timestep.
A.2. Rephrasing Prompts
The prompts given to GPT-4o-mini for rephrasing instructions from the LIBERO robot simulation environment are listed in Tables 4 and 5. Prompt 1 is the main prompt used throughout the experiments,
and Prompts 2 and 3 are used to ablate the sensitivity to the rephrasings. Note that the different
prompts lead to substantially different rephrasings, as Prompts 2 and 3 mandate the retention of the
words “pick” and “place”, while as Table 1 shows, Prompt 1 leads to these words being replaced.

24

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Prompt
Prompt 1

Prompt 2

You are generating alternative phrasings of a robotic task instruction while
preserving its exact meaning.
### Task Instruction: ’[TASK DESCRIPTION]’
### Instructions: - Generate **20** alternative ways to phrase the task
instruction. - Keep each instruction **concise and unambiguous**. - Ensure
the instructions remain suitable for a **robot, not a human**. - Only make
**semantically meaningless** changes (e.g., word order, synonyms, slight
rewording). - Double-check that the new instructions mean the same exact
thing for the robot; do not just substitute synonyms without considering
context. - Do **not** introduce additional steps, remove essential details,
or alter the action.
### Output Format: Each rephrased instruction should be wrapped in
‘[instruction]‘ and ‘[/instruction]‘ tags, like this: [instruction] Rephrased instruction 1 [/instruction] [instruction] Rephrased instruction 2 [/instruction]
You are generating alternative phrasings of a robotic task instruction while
preserving its exact meaning.
### Task Instruction: ’[TASK DESCRIPTION]’
### Instructions: - Generate **20** alternative ways to phrase the task
instruction. - Keep each instruction **concise and unambiguous**. - Ensure
the instructions remain suitable for a **robot, not a human**. - Only make
**semantically meaningless** changes (e.g., word order, synonyms, slight
rewording). - Double-check that the new instructions mean the same exact
thing for the robot; do not just substitute synonyms without considering
context. - Do **not** introduce additional steps, remove essential details,
or alter the action.
- The first word of the instruction should be ‘PICK’, and then it should also
include the word ‘PLACE’.
### Output Format: Each rephrased instruction should be wrapped in
‘[instruction]‘ and ‘[/instruction]‘ tags, like this: [instruction] Rephrased instruction 1 [/instruction] [instruction] Rephrased instruction 2 [/instruction]

Table 4: Prompts 1 and 2 for GPT-4o-mini to rephrase LIBERO task instructions. These prompts are
used for Spatial and Object. There is a small modification for Goal.

25

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Prompt
Prompt 3

You are generating alternative phrasings of a robotic task instruction while
preserving its exact meaning.
### Task Instruction: ’[TASK DESCRIPTION]’
### Instructions: - Generate **20** alternative ways to phrase the task
instruction. - Keep each instruction **concise and unambiguous**. - Ensure
the instructions remain suitable for a **robot, not a human**. - Only make
**semantically meaningless** changes (e.g., word order, synonyms, slight
rewording). - Double-check that the new instructions mean the same exact
thing for the robot; do not just substitute synonyms without considering
context. - Do **not** introduce additional steps, remove essential details,
or alter the action. - Make the changes as minor as possible, as the robot’s
language system is not very robust to rephrasing. - The first word of the
instruction should be ‘PICK’, and then it should also include the word
‘PLACE’.
### Output Format: Each rephrased instruction should be wrapped in
‘[instruction]‘ and ‘[/instruction]‘ tags, like this: [instruction] Rephrased instruction 1 [/instruction] [instruction] Rephrased instruction 2 [/instruction]

Table 5: Prompt 3 for GPT-4o-mini to rephrase LIBERO task instructions. These prompts are used
for Spatial and Object. There is a small modification for Goal.

26

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Dataset

Model

Quant

ECE1

ECE2

Brier

NLL

Succ. Rate

Spatial
Object
Goal
10

NORA
NORA
NORA
NORA

-

0.099
0.210
0.065
0.184

0.115
0.229
0.077
0.212

0.105
0.090
0.111
0.260

0.386
0.343
0.391
0.811

0.894
0.960
0.880
0.674

Spatial
Object
Goal
10

MolmoAct
MolmoAct
MolmoAct
MolmoAct

-

0.113
0.046
0.129
0.175

0.123
0.059
0.141
0.184

0.134
0.062
0.146
0.205

0.625
0.296
0.657
0.716

0.860
0.936
0.846
0.772

Spatial
Object
Goal
10

UniVLA
UniVLA
UniVLA
UniVLA

-

0.162
0.082
0.116
0.134

0.193
0.135
0.163
0.174

0.064
0.054
0.066
0.092

0.282
0.224
0.261
0.339

0.972
0.962
0.958
0.932

Spatial
Object
Goal
10

OpenVLA
OpenVLA
OpenVLA
OpenVLA

-

0.088
0.060
0.151
0.381

0.106
0.073
0.170
0.390

0.150
0.108
0.207
0.398

0.533
0.401
0.707
1.382

0.828
0.880
0.758
0.532

Spatial
Object
Goal

OpenVLA
OpenVLA
OpenVLA

Quant-8
Quant-8
Quant-8

0.070
0.057
0.140

0.093
0.065
0.163

0.138
0.110
0.205

0.488
0.409
0.713

0.844
0.876
0.760

Spatial
Object
Goal

OpenVLA
OpenVLA
OpenVLA

Quant-4
Quant-4
Quant-4

0.067
0.091
0.161

0.086
0.112
0.182

0.149
0.135
0.231

0.503
0.489
0.748

0.822
0.850
0.712

Table 6: All task success and calibration results for 22 VLA/task suite combinations.

Appendix B. Additional Experiment Results
All task success and calibration results for 22 VLA/task suite combinations are shown in Table 6.
B.1. Relationship Between Task Success and Calibration
Table 6 features all results plotted in Figure 3.

27

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Model

Dataset

Method

ECE1

ECE2

Brier score

NLL

OpenVLA Quant-8

Spatial

Baseline
Reprompt

0.070
0.050

0.093
0.062

0.138
0.131

0.488
0.434

Object

Baseline
Reprompt

0.057
0.041

0.065
0.052

0.110
0.108

0.409
0.375

Goal

Baseline
Reprompt

0.140
0.117

0.163
0.152

0.205
0.194

0.713
0.608

Spatial

Baseline
Reprompt

0.067
0.055

0.086
0.079

0.149
0.148

0.503
0.482

Object

Baseline
Reprompt

0.091
0.066

0.112
0.094

0.135
0.132

0.489
0.454

Goal

Baseline
Reprompt

0.161
0.146

0.182
0.154

0.231
0.224

0.748
0.672

OpenVLA Quant-4

Table 7: Calibration error measurements using the 8-bit and 4-bit fine-tuned model versions and
3 different LIBERO task suites, for 2 different methods of confidence estimation: (1) baseline (2)
ensembling over semantically equivalent prompts (“Reprompt”). The prompt ensemble method
improves all measures across all settings.

Figure 7: Percent change in calibration error measurements by ensembling over semantically
equivalent prompts.
B.2. Prompt Ensembling
Table 7 has prompt ensemble results for the quantized OpenVLA models. Figure 7 shows trends in
percent change in calibration error using the prompt ensemble method.
B.3. Ablations for Prompt Ensembles
To understand the robustness of our prompt ensemble results, we perform multiple ablations using
the OpenVLA model.
28

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 8: Ablation results for the prompt ensemble method, where different prompts are given to
GPT-4o-mini for producing the rephrasings of the original instruction. Prompt 1 is used in the main
experiments, while Prompts 2 and 3 are variants. Results show that improvements in calibration error
from Reprompt are robust to different rephrasing prompts.

Figure 9: Ablating the number of prompts in the prompt ensemble for the Spatial, Goal, and Object
task suites. Increasing the number of prompts generally improves calibration error.
First, we consider the effect of changing the prompt given to GPT-4o-mini for producing the 20
instruction rephrasings. In addition to the prompt used to produce the results in Table 2, we try two
additional prompts, recorded in Appendix Table 4 and Table 5; “Prompt 1” is the original prompt,
and “Prompt 2” and “Prompt 3” represent new prompts for the ablation. Note that the different

29

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

prompts lead to substantially different rephrasings, as Prompts 2 and 3 mandate the retention of the
words “pick” and “place”, while as Table 1 shows, Prompt 1 leads to these words being replaced.
The ablation is run across all 3 task suites using fine-tuned OpenVLA, and we measure ECE1 and
NLL. Results are shown in Figure 8. Improvements in calibration error from the Reprompt method
are robust to different rephrasing prompts, with all ensemble variants producing lower error than the
baseline method across both metrics and all 3 task suites.
Second, we consider the effect of the number of prompts used in the prompt ensemble. Given a
sound ensembling approach, we would expect to see improvement as more prompts are added to
the ensemble (up to some point). To study this question, we record results using k ∈ {1, 5, 10, 20}
different rephrasings (randomly chosen for 1000 trials when k < 20). Results for the Spatial, Goal,
and Object task suites are shown in Figure 9. We see that the algorithm behaves favorably, where
calibration error generally decreases as more instructions are included in the ensemble.

30

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 10: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Spatial task suite and
the Quant-8 OpenVLA model.
B.4. Calibration Across Task Time
Figures 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 offer additional results on calibration across the task time horizon
using the OpenVLA model. Figures 15, 16, and 17 offer results for the same experiment on UniVLA.
Figure 18 shows further qualitative examples from the context-aware monitoring experiment.

31

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 11: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Object task suite and
the full precision OpenVLA model.

Figure 12: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Object task suite and
the Quant-8 OpenVLA model.

32

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 13: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Goal task suite and
the full precision OpenVLA model.

Figure 14: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Goal task suite and
the Quant-8 OpenVLA model.

33

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 15: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Spatial task suite and
the UniVLA model.

Figure 16: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Object task suite and
the UniVLA model.

34

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 17: Empirical study of calibration error across task time horizon for the Goal task suite and
the UniVLA model.

35

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

B.4.1. Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES OF C ONTEXT-AWARE C ONFIDENCE M ONITORING
Additional qualitative examples of our confidence-aware monitoring demonstration are provided in
Figure 18. These include cases where the strategy succeeds and others where it fails (e.g., confidence
falls below the threshold while grasping in an ultimately successful trial).

36

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 18: Qualitative examples of a context-aware confidence calibration strategy for the task “put
the wine bottle on the rack”. The red dashed line represents the 10% quantile of the confidence
estimates output by the model across the task horizon, representing a potential threshold below which
the robot may abstain from performing the task.

37

T. Z OLLO & R. Z EMEL . C ONFIDENCE C ALIBRATION IN V ISION -L ANGUAGE -ACTION M ODELS

Figure 19: On the left of each pair of plots, we compare miscalibration across action dimensions.
On the right, we compare the performance of typical Platt scaling, temperature scaling, histogram
binning, and Platt binning to action-wise Platt scaling.
B.5. Calibration Across Action Dimensions
Figure 19 shows additional results for the action-wise recalibration experiments.

38

