Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

VALUE -G UIDED ACTION P LANNING
W ORLD M ODELS

WITH

JEPA

Matthieu Destrade 1,2∗, Oumayma Bounou3 , Quentin Le Lidec3 , Jean Ponce2,3 , Yann LeCun3
École Polytechnique 2 ENS Paris 3 New York University

1

arXiv:2601.00844v1 [cs.LG] 28 Dec 2025

A BSTRACT
Building deep learning models that can reason about their environment requires
capturing its underlying dynamics. Joint-Embedded Predictive Architectures
(JEPA) provide a promising framework to model such dynamics by learning representations and predictors through a self-supervised prediction objective. However,
their ability to support effective action planning remains limited. We propose an
approach to enhance planning with JEPA world models by shaping their representation space so that the negative goal-conditioned value function for a reaching cost in a given environment is approximated by a distance (or quasi-distance)
between state embeddings. We introduce a practical method to enforce this constraint during training and show that it leads to significantly improved planning
performance compared to standard JEPA models on simple control tasks.

1

I NTRODUCTION

World models are a class of deep learning architectures designed to capture the dynamics of systems
(Ha & Schmidhuber (2018); Ding et al. (2025)). They are trained to predict future states of an environment given a sequence of actions. By explicitly modeling the system’s dynamics, they capture
a causal understanding of how actions influence future outcomes, enabling reasoning and planning
over possible trajectories.
Among the various architectures proposed to implement such models, Joint-Embedded Predictive
Architectures (JEPA) (LeCun (2022)) provide an effective framework for learning predictive representations. By optimizing a self-supervised prediction loss, JEPA models jointly learn representations of states and predictors that map past states and actions to future representations. This formulation has proven effective for both representation learning (Assran et al. (2023); Bardes et al. (2024))
and action planning (Sobal et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2025)), the latter referring to the optimization
of action sequences that drive a system from an initial state to a goal state.
In this work, we aim to enhance the planning capabilities of JEPA models. Inspired by advances
in reinforcement learning, we learn representations such that the Euclidean distance (or a quasidistance) between embedded states approximates the negative goal-conditioned value function associated with a reaching cost (Park et al. (2024b;a); Wang et al. (2023)). This structure provides
a meaningful latent representation space for planning, potentially mitigating local minima during
planning optimization. We evaluate our method on control tasks and observe that incorporating such
representations consistently improves planning performance compared to standard JEPA models.

2

R ELATED WORK

2.1

JEPA WORLD MODELS

Joint-Embedded Predictive Architectures (JEPA) (LeCun (2022)) provide an effective way to implement world models for representation learning and action planning. They rely on the hypothesis
that predicting future states is easier in a learned representation space than in the original observation space, and that enforcing predictability encourages meaningful representations. A JEPA model
typically consists of a state encoder, an action encoder, and a predictor. It is trained on sequences
of states and actions by minimizing a prediction loss, Lpred , between a predicted representation and
∗

Correspondence: matthieu.destrade@polytechnique.edu

1

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

that of the actual state resulting from applying a given action. To prevent collapse during training,
standard approaches use a VCReg loss, LVCReg , as in Sobal et al. (2025), or an exponential moving
average (EMA) scheme, as in Assran et al. (2023); Bardes et al. (2024).
Recent works (Sobal et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2025)) have applied JEPA models to action-planning
tasks, showing promising yet still limited performance. To do so, they employ a model predictive
control (MPC) procedure (Garcı́a et al. (1989)), which iteratively minimizes a planning loss measuring the distance between predicted and goal representations over a finite horizon.
2.2

L EARNING A VALUE FUNCTION

To improve the effectiveness of MPC, several works have proposed learning a value function to
guide the MPC procedure Farshidian et al. (2019); Jordana et al. (2025). This approach allows MPC
to account for longer time horizons, and can stabilize the procedure by providing an additional cost
term whose minimization facilitates goal-reaching tasks.
Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) Ghosh et al. (2023); Kostrikov et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2023) learns a
goal-conditioned value function from unlabeled trajectories by leveraging expectile regression. The
authors of Park et al. (2024b) leverage IQL to learn a structured representation space for states of a
system, where the negative Euclidean distance approximates a goal-conditioned value function corresponding to the terminal cost in a reaching objective. They show that these representations enable
solving various reinforcement learning tasks efficiently. Since a goal-conditioned value function
is not symmetric in general, additional work has proposed learning it using a quasi-distance Wang
et al. (2023).

3

VALUE - GUIDED JEPA FOR ACTION PLANNING

To improve the planning capabilities of JEPA models, we focus on enhancing the representations
used to compute the MPC planning cost. In the standard JEPA framework, planning is performed
by minimizing the distance between a predicted state and the goal in the representation space. However, this cost can have numerous local minima, making optimization challenging. To address this,
we propose learning representations such that the Euclidean distance in the representation space
corresponds to the negative of the goal-conditioned value function associated with a reaching cost
in a given environment, as in Park et al. (2024b). Unlike previous works, we focus on using these
representations for planning with JEPA models and MPC procedures, rather than solely for policy execution. Under this formulation, setting the planning cost to the learned value function and
minimizing it naturally drives the model toward the goal.
3.1

BASELINE LOSS FUNCTIONS

To enforce the value function criterion in the representation space, we consider several simple loss
functions for the state encoder of a JEPA model, which serve as baselines. Specifically, we apply
a contrastive loss Lcontrastive using successive states from training trajectories as positive examples
and random pairs of states as negative examples, as well as a regression loss Lregressive explicitly
enforcing the distance between successive states to be 1.
3.2

IQL FOR JEPA MODELS

Let S0 be the state space, θ the parameters and Eθ the state encoder of a JEPA model. For
all (s, g) ∈ S02 , we define Vθ (s, g) = −∥Eθ (s) − Eθ (g)∥2 . Our goal is to learn θ such
that Vθ approximates the goal-conditioned value function V ⋆ associated with the reaching cost
C : (s, a, g) 7→ 1s̸=g , which penalizes all time steps where the state s is not equal to the goal g.
Let (T, N ) ∈ N2 represent the length of the training trajectories and the number of training goals.
Let D be a dataset of trajectories (st )t∈J0,T K belonging to S0T +1 and goals (gn )n∈J0,N K belonging to
S0N +1 . We minimize the mean IQL loss with respect to θ via gradient descent:
∀((st ), (gn )) ∈ D,

LθVF ((st ), (gn )) =

N T
−1
X
X
n=0 t=0

2



L2τ −1st ̸=gn +γVθ̄ (st+1 , gn )−Vθ (st , gn ) , (1)

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

where ¯· denotes a stop-gradient ; τ, γ ∈]0, 1[ are close to 1 ; and for all x ∈ R, the term
L2τ (x) = |τ − 1x<0 | x2 performs expectile regression. The parameter γ is the discount factor of
the value function we aim to learn. In practice, we use two different types of goals: the last state of
the training trajectories, and random goals sampled from the training batches.
To obtain a better approximation, we further explore replacing the Euclidean distance in the definition of Vθ with a quasimetric distance, following Wang et al. (2023). The quasi-distance used to
learn V ⋆ is the generic form introduced in Wang & Isola (2022).
We consider two approaches to training JEPA models. The first approach, which we call “Sep”,
consists of training the state encoder alone using the LVF objective, followed by training the action
encoder and predictor with the Lpred loss. The second approach consists of training all networks
together using as objective the sum of LVF and Lpred .

4

E XPERIMENTS

4.1

E XPERIMENT SETTINGS

We conduct our experiments in two environments under an offline reinforcement learning setting.
Models are trained with random trajectories sampled in the environments. The states used as inputs to our models are observation images, potentially including additional sensory information. A
detailed description of the datasets used is provided in the Appendix 7.1.
The wall environment consists of a square space separated by a wall with a door. The positions of
the wall and door are randomly initialized when the environment is instantiated. The agent has to
move from a random starting position to a random goal located on the opposite side of the wall. It
can execute actions that are vectors corresponding to displacements. We generate datasets with two
settings: WS, with actions of small norms, and WB, with actions of larger norms.
The maze environment consists of an agent that must move from a random starting point to a random goal within a random maze. Its actions are velocity commands. Planning in this environment
requires that both the agent’s position and velocity be encoded in the representations, as it simulates
inertia. Following a similar approach to Sobal et al. (2025), we include the agent’s velocity as an
input to the encoders for a given state.
4.2

P LANNING WITH THE REPRESENTATIONS

We conduct experiments to evaluate the planning performance of different learning methods. Specifically, we train JEPA models with:
Name
Contrastive
Regressive
pred VCReg
pred EMA
VF

State encoder loss
Lcontrastive
Lregressive & LVCReg
LVCReg
EMA procedure
LVF

Sep
✓
✓
×
×
✓

Name
VF pred
VF quasi
VF quasi pred
VF VCReg
VF VCReg pred

State encoder loss
LVF
LVF & quasi-distance
LVF & quasi-distance
LVF & LVCReg
LVF & LVCReg

Sep
×
✓
×
✓
×

Table 1: Training approaches
The precise settings of the experiments are described in Appendix 7.2.
We assess the quality of the learned representations by evaluating the planning accuracy of the
model, defined as the proportion of successful plans for random pairs of initial states and goals. We
compute this success rate on 200 instances of the wall environment and 80 of the maze one, so that
the variance of the results is small. We use an MPC procedure with an MPPI optimizer. The results
are displayed in Table 2.
They show that IQL-inspired approaches provide valuable guidance during planning and achieve
better results than intuitive or prediction-based approaches, as used in Sobal et al. (2025). Interestingly, the VF quasi approach consistently outperforms the VF approach, even when the theoretical
3

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

Type
Contrastive
Regressive
pred VCReg
pred EMA
VF

WS
0.49
0.54
0.55
0.46
0.63

WB
0.59
0.57
0.89
0.43
0.94

Maze
0.50
0.46
0.54
0.04
0.49

Type
VF pred
VF quasi
VF quasi pred
VF VCReg
VF VCReg pred

WS
0.55
0.71
0.61
0.49
0.47

WB
0.75
0.96
0.85
0.75
0.67

Maze
0.49
0.63
0.43
0.39
0.39

Table 2: Planning results in the different environments
value function is symmetric. This suggests that using a quasi-distance always facilitates the training
process by enhancing the expressiveness of the networks.
Learning representations using both a prediction loss and an IQL loss is less effective than using the
latter loss alone. Using VCReg to promote diversity when learning with an IQL loss also results in
poor planning performance. The results obtained with the WB dataset are better than those obtained
with the WS dataset. This may be due to the fact that a single trajectory explores more of the
environment in the WB dataset, and that the agent is more likely to collide with the wall.

5

D ISCUSSION

Locality of the training. The imperfect results indicate that the value functions learned with our
approach are inaccurate. While local relationships between states can be expected to be correctly
captured, this is less probable for distant relationships, for two main reasons. First, during training,
the space of distant triplets of states (starting state, following state and goal) is sparsely sampled.
Second, the gradient of the discounted value function with respect to the state becomes small when
the state is far from the given goal. For such states, the signal-to-noise ratio of the value function
tends to be low. This suggests that using a hierarchy of representation spaces, where higher levels
model longer-range transitions or more coarsely sampled trajectories, may better capture distant
relationships and yield improved results.
Influence of the dataset. Theoretical results on the IQL loss show that only the support of the policy
used to create the training dataset actually matters when τ tends to 1. In practice, however, other
factors are likely relevant. In highly suboptimal trajectories, states that are close to each other may
appear far apart, potentially making training more difficult. Therefore, it might be preferable to use
“expert” trajectories. However, they are often hard to obtain and come at the cost of diversity and
exploration. Moreover, it is important that the states used in the IQL loss during training span the
entire state space. In practice, this can be achieved either by increasing the size of the training dataset
or by employing more effective data collection strategies that better explore underrepresented states.

6

C ONCLUSION

In this study, we aimed to improve the planning capabilities of JEPA world models. To this end, we
proposed enhancing the representations used for planning by learning them such that the Euclidean
distance, or a quasi-distance, in the representation space approximates the negative goal-conditioned
value function associated with a goal-reaching cost for the system under consideration. This was
achieved by training the state encoder of a JEPA model using an implicit Q-learning (IQL) loss.
We compared these methods to more intuitive approaches, as well as to standard prediction-based
JEPA training approaches, on benchmark action-planning tasks. Our results show that the value
function–based methods, particularly those using a quasi-distance, achieve superior performance,
suggesting that such approaches are a promising direction for world model action planning.
Further experiments would be valuable, especially in random environments. Prediction-based methods are indeed expected to be more robust to stochasticity in non-deterministic environments and
may enable the learning of more general representations than the other approaches tested, whereas
our IQL approach is known to be biased in random environments.

4

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

R EFERENCES
Mahmoud Assran, Quentin Duval, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Pascal Vincent, Michael Rabbat,
Yann LeCun, and Nicolas Ballas. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding
predictive architecture, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.08243.
Adrien Bardes, Quentin Garrido, Jean Ponce, Xinlei Chen, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, Mahmoud
Assran, and Nicolas Ballas. Revisiting feature prediction for learning visual representations from
video, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.08471.
Jingtao Ding, Yunke Zhang, Yu Shang, Yuheng Zhang, Zefang Zong, Jie Feng, Yuan Yuan,
Hongyuan Su, Nian Li, Nicholas Sukiennik, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Understanding world or
predicting future? a comprehensive survey of world models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2411.14499.
Farbod Farshidian, David Hoeller, and Marco Hutter. Deep value model predictive control, 2019.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03358.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
data-driven reinforcement learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07219.
Carlos E. Garcı́a, David M. Prett, and Manfred Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and
practice—a survey. Automatica, 25(3):335–348, 1989. ISSN 0005-1098. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/0005-1098(89)90002-2. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0005109889900022.
Dibya Ghosh, Chethan Bhateja, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning from passive data via
latent intentions, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04782.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. 2018. doi: 10.5281/ZENODO.1207631. URL
https://zenodo.org/record/1207631.
Armand Jordana, Sébastien Kleff, Arthur Haffemayer, Joaquim Ortiz-Haro, Justin Carpentier, Nicolas Mansard, and Ludovic Righetti. Infinite-horizon value function approximation for model
predictive control, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06760.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit qlearning, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06169.
Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9.2, 2022-06-27. 2022.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:251881108.
Seohong Park, Dibya Ghosh, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Hiql: Offline goalconditioned rl with latent states as actions, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
11949.
Seohong Park, Tobias Kreiman, and Sergey Levine. Foundation policies with hilbert representations,
2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.15567.
Vlad Sobal, Wancong Zhang, Kynghyun Cho, Randall Balestriero, Tim G. J. Rudner, and Yann
LeCun. Learning from reward-free offline data: A case for planning with latent dynamics models,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14819.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Improved representation of asymmetrical distances with interval
quasimetric embeddings. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry in Neural
Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KRiST_rzkGl.
Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Phillip Isola, and Amy Zhang. Optimal goal-reaching reinforcement learning via quasimetric learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
01203.
Haoran Xu, Li Jiang, Jianxiong Li, and Xianyuan Zhan. A policy-guided imitation approach for
offline reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08323.
Gaoyue Zhou, Hengkai Pan, Yann LeCun, and Lerrel Pinto. Dino-wm: World models on pretrained visual features enable zero-shot planning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2411.04983.
5

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

7

A PPENDIX

7.1

DATASETS

7.1.1

WALL

The observations of states in the wall environment are of size 64 × 64 and consist of 2 channels: one
representing the agent and the other representing the walls. Visualizations of typical states of this
environment (with flattened channels) are shown in Fig. 1.
To generate the dataset of training trajectories, we follow the approach of
Sobal et al. (2025), and do not sample actions using Gaussian noise, as
this would result in trajectories concentrated in a small region of the environment. Instead, we generate actions
by sampling a random direction, perturbing it with noise drawn from the
von Mises distribution with concentration parameter 5. We generate datasets
containing 1000 trajectories of length
64, ensuring that half of the trajectories
correspond to the agent passing through
the door.

Crossing trajectory, WS Non-crossing trajectory, WB
Figure 1: Examples of trajectories from the wall datasets

The WS dataset is generated with action norms sampled randomly from a Gaussian distribution
with mean 1 pixel and standard deviation 0.4, and clipped to the range [0.2, 1.8]. The WB dataset
is generated with action norms sampled randomly from a Gaussian distribution with mean 2 pixels
and standard deviation 0.8, and clipped to the range [0.4, 3.6].
7.1.2

M AZE

The maze environment follows the setting used in Sobal et al. (2025), which is based on the Mujoco
PointMaze environment Fu et al. (2021). It uses a grid of 4 × 4 squares, of which between 50% and
60% contiguous squares are selected to form the maze. Observations of states in this environment
are of size 64 × 64, are colored, and have 3 channels.
The actions controlling the agent correspond to target speeds to reach. The environment computes
the force required to achieve the desired speed after a certain number of time steps. The trajectories
are generated by sampling random speed vectors with norms smaller than 5, starting from random
positions. To evaluate the planning capabilities of our approaches in this environment, random
starting points and goals are sampled, such that they are at least 3 cells apart. The dataset contains
1000 trajectories of length 101.
To assess the generalization capabilities of the different approaches we experiment with, we follow
the methodology of Sobal et al. (2025). The training trajectories all belong to five maze layouts, that
are different from those used for evaluation.

Figure 2: Examples of states of the maze environment (the agent is the green point)
7.2

E XPERIMENT SETTINGS

The code used for the experiments is based on an implementation of JEPA models for action planning by Sobal et al. (2025).
6

Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026

In the models, we use flat representations of size 512, a predictor with a MLP architecture and an
action encoder set to the identity. The state encoder is based on a simple architecture combining
convolutions and residual connections. Before being passed to the predictor, the representations of
states and actions are concatenated. The encoder has 2.2M parameters and the predictor has 1.3M
parameters. The input trajectories are subsampled into segments of length 16 during training.
All networks were trained with a base learning rate of 0.0028, using the Adam optimizer and a
cosine learning rate schedule. For the wall environments, the VCReg loss is computed along the
batch dimension of the representations. At planning time, the MPPI optimization in the MPC is
configured with 2000 initial perturbations sampled from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and
standard deviation 12, and a temperature parameter of λ = 0.005. We use a planning horizon of
96 for a total of 200 planning steps in the WS environment, and a planning horizon of 64 for a
total of 64 planning steps in the WB environment. For the maze environment, the VCReg loss is
computed along both the batch and temporal dimensions. The MPPI optimization in the MPC is
configured with 500 initial perturbations sampled from a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and
standard deviation 5, and a temperature parameter of λ = 0.0025. We use a planning horizon of 100
for a total of 200 planning steps.
For all experiments, we use γ = 0.98 and τ = 0.80 for the VF-based approaches, and γ = 0.93
and τ = 0.60 for the VF quasi-based ones. These values were optimized following the procedure
described in Appendix 7.3
7.3

A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

Hyperparameter optimization. Before running our experiments, we optimized the two main hyperparameters controlling the behavior of the value function learning methods, namely τ and γ. This
was done using a WS dataset different from the one used for the rest of the tests. The results are
shown below:

Results for γ (τ = 0.7)

Results for τ (VF: γ = 0.98, VF quasi: γ = 0.93)

Figure 3: Evolution of planning accuracy with respect to hyperparameters
Increasing γ improves performance, as it better captures the relationships between distant states. The
same applies to τ , which should theoretically be set as close to 1 as possible. However, setting either
parameter too close to 1 introduces instabilities that degrade performance. We chose the values of γ
and τ that maximized the planning accuracy for the rest of the experiments.
Separate predictive and planning representations. One might hypothesize that representations
learned using a prediction loss yield better prediction accuracy, while those learned with an IQL
approach result in a more effective planning cost. It is possible to combine the advantages of both
by adopting an intermediate approach. In this approach, two separate representation spaces are
learned: the first with a standard prediction loss, and the second with an IQL loss using a second
state encoder. During planning, the first level is used to compute predictions, and the second level to
compute the cost. We tested this method with the WS dataset using the pred VCReg approach for
the first level and the VF approach for the second level. It did not improve planning results, with a
planning accuracy of 0.60.

7

