Policy-Guided World Model Planning
for Language-Conditioned Visual Navigation
Amirhosein Chahe
Lifeng Zhou*
Drexel University
Philadelphia PA 19104, USA

arXiv:2603.25981v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026

{ac4462, lz457}@drexel.edu

Abstract
Navigating to a visually specified goal given natural language instructions remains a fundamental challenge in embodied AI. Existing approaches either rely on reactive policies that struggle with long-horizon planning, or employ
world models that suffer from poor action initialization
in high-dimensional spaces. We present PiJEPA, a twostage framework that combines the strengths of learned
navigation policies with latent world model planning for
instruction-conditioned visual navigation. In the first stage,
we finetune an Octo-based generalist policy, augmented
with a frozen pretrained vision encoder (DINOv2 or VJEPA-2), on the CAST navigation dataset to produce an
informed action distribution conditioned on the current observation and language instruction. In the second stage,
we use this policy-derived distribution to warm-start Model
Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) planning over a separately trained JEPA world model, which predicts future latent states in the embedding space of the same frozen encoder. By initializing the MPPI sampling distribution from
the policy prior rather than from an uninformed Gaussian, our planner converges faster to high-quality action
sequences that reach the goal. We systematically study
the effect of the vision encoder backbone, comparing DINOv2 and V-JEPA-2, across both the policy and world
model components. Experiments on real-world navigation
tasks demonstrate that PiJEPA significantly outperforms
both standalone policy execution and uninformed world
model planning, achieving improved goal-reaching accuracy and instruction-following fidelity. Code is available
at: https://github.com/AmirhoseinCh/PiJEPA.

1. Introduction
Building autonomous agents that can navigate to a goal
specified by an image and a natural language instruction is a
* Corresponding author.

long-standing challenge in robotics and computer vision [1–
3]. Given a current egocentric observation ot , a goal image
og , and an instruction ℓ (e.g. “move towards the stairs”),
the agent must produce a sequence of actions that reliably
reaches the goal while respecting the semantics of the instruction.
Recent vision-language-action (VLA) models [3–6]
have made remarkable strides toward this objective. Generalist policies such as Octo [4] and NoMaD [7] can be finetuned on domain-specific navigation data to achieve impressive short-horizon control, while the CAST framework [6]
further strengthens instruction following through counterfactual language-action augmentation. Despite their effectiveness, these reactive policies predict actions in a single
forward pass and thus lack the capacity to reason about the
long-term consequences of their decisions.
A complementary line of work addresses this limitation
by learning world models that predict future states conditioned on candidate actions, enabling explicit planning toward the goal [8–12]. Among these, Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture World Models (JEPA-WMs) [12–14]
are especially attractive: by learning dynamics in the latent
space of a frozen pretrained encoder, they support efficient
rollouts without pixel-level reconstruction. At inference
time, a sampling-based optimizer such as MPPI [15, 16]
or CEM [17] searches over action sequences by unrolling
the learned predictor and minimizing the embedding-space
distance to the encoded goal. However, this search must
typically begin from an uninformed prior over a highdimensional action space, resulting in slow convergence and
susceptibility to local minima [13].
We propose PiJEPA, a framework that bridges these two
paradigms by using a learned policy to warm-start world
model planning. Our key insight is that a finetuned VLA
policy, while insufficient for long-horizon reasoning on its
own, provides a highly informative action prior: it concentrates probability mass in the region of action space
most likely to make progress toward the goal. Initializing
the MPPI sampling distribution from this prior allows the

world model planner to devote its search budget to refining
already-promising trajectories rather than exploring the full
action space from scratch.
Concretely, our pipeline operates as follows (see Figure 1):
1. Policy prior. Given the current observation ot and instruction ℓ, a finetuned Octo model produces Nπ action chunk samples via its diffusion head. We transform
these into the world model’s local-frame action space
and compute their empirical mean µπ and standard deviation σπ .
2. MPPI planning. A JEPA world model, trained with the
same frozen encoder, predicts future latent states. We
run MPPI initialized at (µπ , σπ ) and optimize against the
embedding-space distance to the encoded goal og .
3. Execution. The first action of the optimized sequence is
executed, and the process repeats at the next replanning
step.
Our contributions are:
1. We propose PiJEPA, a unified framework for languageconditioned visual navigation that combines a finetuned
Octo policy with MPPI-based planning over a JEPA
world model, using the policy output to warm-start the
planner.
2. We train both components with modern pretrained vision encoders (DINOv2 and V-JEPA-2), providing a systematic comparison of image-based vs. video-based representations for policy learning and world modeling in
navigation.
3. We demonstrate on real-world navigation tasks that
policy-guided planning significantly outperforms both
standalone policy execution and uninformed MPPI planning, improving goal-reaching accuracy and instructionfollowing fidelity.

2. Related Work
Our work draws on two active research threads, languageconditioned policies and latent world models; and unifies
them through policy-guided planning. We review each in
turn.

2.1. Language-Conditioned Navigation Policies
The integration of natural language with embodied perception has given rise to Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models that map instructions and visual observations directly to
motor commands. Generalist architectures such as Octo [4]
learn broadly from diverse robot data, while recent scalable
designs including Dita [18], LAPA [19], and CLAP [20]
push the frontier of reactive instruction-following through
latent action representations. In the navigation domain
specifically, UrbanNav [21] extends language-guided policies to complex urban environments via web-scale trajectory learning. Although these systems achieve strong short-

horizon performance, they share a common limitation: actions are selected greedily without explicit reasoning about
future states, which degrades performance on tasks that require multi-step spatial planning. PiJEPA retains the rapid,
instruction-grounded action proposals of a reactive VLA
policy but uses them as a warm start for a separate planning stage, thereby combining language understanding with
long-horizon deliberation.

2.2. Latent World Models for Planning
World models offer a principled route to long-horizon reasoning by enabling agents to simulate the consequences of
candidate actions before committing to them. Early approaches such as Navigation World Models (NWM) [11]
synthesize pixel-level futures, but predicting dynamics in
a learned latent space drastically reduces computational
cost. Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA)
world models built on frozen foundation encoders like DINOv2 have proven particularly effective for physical planning tasks [12, 13]. This family of models has been
further advanced through continuous latent action formulations [22], principled regularization strategies such as
LeJEPA [23], and joint VLA-latent pretraining [24]. Complementary efforts have also targeted the efficiency of
the planning loop itself; for instance, One-Step World
Model [25] reduces the computational latency of multistep rollouts, and benchmarks like Target-Bench [26] evaluate world-model-based path planning toward text-specified
targets. Despite these advances, sampling-based planners
such as MPPI and CEM remain sensitive to their initialization: starting from an uninformed Gaussian prior over highdimensional action spaces leads to slow convergence and
frequent entrapment in local minima [13]. PiJEPA directly
addresses this inference-time bottleneck. Rather than conditioning the world model itself on language, which would
conflate representation learning with instruction grounding,
we keep the latent dynamics model language-agnostic and
instead anchor the MPPI optimization with an instructionaware action prior drawn from the VLA policy. This decoupled design lets each component focus on what it does best:
the policy provides efficient, semantically informed proposals, while the world model evaluates and refines them over
extended horizons.

3. Method
We present PiJEPA, a two-stage approach for instructionconditioned visual goal navigation. An overview is shown
in Figure 1. Our pipeline consists of three learned components: a frozen pretrained vision encoder, an Octo-based
policy that generates an informed action prior, and a JEPA
world model over which we perform MPPI planning warmstarted by the policy prior.

Language Instruction ℓ
“Move forward curving
slightly to the left”

zt

Policy Prior
(µπ , σπ )

Octo Policy πθ

Start image ot

Goal image og

PiJEPA
(Optimize actions via temperature-

Eϕ

Eϕ

weighted resampling)

Iterative
refinement
at+H−1

at

Planning cost Lp
zt

Pψ

ẑt+1

...

ẑt+H−1

Pψ

ẑt+H

zg

Predictor unroll Fϕ,ψ

Figure 1. Overview of PiJEPA. Top: The Octo policy, finetuned with a frozen vision encoder (Eϕ ), takes the current latent observation
zt and instruction ℓ as input and produces action chunk samples via its diffusion head. These are transformed from the global frame to
the world model’s local body frame. Middle: The policy’s statistics (µπ , σπ ) warm-starts MPPI, which iteratively optimizes the action
distribution over J iterations. Bottom: The JEPA world model predictor (Pψ ), trained with the same frozen encoder, autoregressively
predicts future latent states. The MPPI candidates are scored by unrolling the world model and evaluating the latent-space distance to the
encoded goal zg (Algorithm 1).

3.1. Problem Formulation
At each timestep t, the agent observes an egocentric RGB
image ot , is given a goal image og and a natural language
instruction ℓ, and must produce a sequence of navigation actions a1:H ∈ RH×A over a planning horizon H that guides
the robot towards the goal while respecting the instruction
semantics.

3.2. Policy Prior from Octo
The first stage of PiJEPA extracts an action prior from a
finetuned Octo policy [4]. Octo is a transformer-based generalist policy with a diffusion action head that models the
distribution πθ (a|ot , ℓ) over action chunks.
Both the policy and the world model operate on top of
a shared frozen pretrained vision encoder Eϕ that maps observations to latent tokens zt = Eϕ (ot ) ∈ Rn×d , where n
is the number of spatial tokens and d is the embedding dimension. The encoder weights ϕ remain frozen throughout,
ensuring both components share a consistent representation
space.

3.3. JEPA World Model
The second component is a Joint-Embedding Predictive
World Model (JEPA-WM) [12, 13] that predicts future latent states given the current state and actions. The world
model pairs the same frozen encoder Eϕ with a learnable
predictor Pψ and action encoder Aψ . Given a context of encoded observations and actions, the predictor forecasts the

next latent state:
ẑt+1 = Pψ (zt−w:t , Aψ (at−w:t )) .

(1)

The predictor uses a causal attention mask so it can predict from all context lengths up to a maximum window w.
Actions are injected into the predictor via a conditioning
mechanism at every layer to prevent vanishing action signals through depth [13].
The predictor is trained to minimize the MSE between
predicted and target embeddings. Following [13], we use a
multi-step rollout loss to improve long-horizon accuracy:
Ltotal =

Kroll
B
X
1 X
k=1

B

2

b
Fϕ,ψ (ztb , abt:t+k−1 ) − zt+k
,
2

(2)

b=1

where Fϕ,ψ denotes the autoregressive unrolling of the predictor (feeding each predicted ẑt+j as context for the next
step), trained with truncated backpropagation through time.

3.4. Policy-Guided MPPI Planning
At test time, we combine the Octo policy prior with the
JEPA world model through MPPI-based planning [15, 16].
We first draw Nπ action chunk samples from the policy
diffusion head. Because the policy and world model may
operate in different action coordinate frames, each sample is transformed by a mapping T into the world model
frame (details in Section 4.1). From the transformed samples ã(i) = T (a(i) ), we compute the initial MPPI mean and

Algorithm 1 PiJEPA: Policy-Guided World Model MPPI
Planning

standard deviation:
µ0 =

Nπ
1 X
ã(i) ,
Nπ i=1



σ 0 = clamp std({ã(i) }), σmin , σmax ,

(3)
which defines a policy-informed initialization over action
sequences.
Planning objective. Given the encoded current observation
zt and goal encoding zg , we evaluate a candidate action sequence a1:H by the terminal latent distance
Lp (zt , a1:H , zg ) =

n
1X

n i=1

(i)

ẑt+H − zg(i)

2

,
2

(4)

where ẑt+H = Fϕ,ψ (zt , a1:H ) is obtained by autoregressively rolling out the world model for H steps.
MPPI refinement. Starting from (µ0 , σ 0 ), MPPI iteratively samples candidate action sequences, evaluates them
using Eq. 4, and updates the sampling distribution using
temperature-weighted elite trajectories. At iteration j, elite
weights are computed as

exp λ (cmin − ck )
w k = PK
(5)
,
′
k′ =1 exp λ (cmin − ck )
and the Gaussian parameters are updated by
X
X
2
µj+1 =
wk a(k) ,
(σ j+1 )2 =
wk a(k) −µj+1 ,
k

Require: Obs. ot , goal og , instruction ℓ, policy πθ , world
model Pψ , encoder Eϕ
Require: Horizon H, samples N , elites K, iterations J,
temperature λ, policy samples Nπ
Stage 1: Policy prior
1: zt ← Eϕ (ot ),
zg ← Eϕ (og )
2: for i = 1, . . . , Nπ do
3:
a(i) ∼ πθ (· | ot , ℓ)

Stage 2: MPPI planning
8: for j = 0, . . . , J − 1 do

19:

for i = 1, . . . , N do

(i)
a1:H ← clamp µj + σ j ⊙ ϵ(i) , −1, 1
ϵ(i) ∼ N (0, I)
ẑ ← zt
for h = 1, . . . , H do
(i)
ẑ ← Pψ (ẑ, ah )
▷ autoregressive rollout
end for
c(i) ← ∥ẑ − zg ∥22 /n
▷ Eq. 4
end for
E ← top-K by lowest c(i) P
wk ← exp(λ (cmin − ck )) / k′ exp(λ (cmin − ck′ ))

20:

µj+1 ←

9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:

k

(6)
with σ j+1 clamped to [σmin , σmax ]. After J iterations, one
elite trajectory is sampled proportionally to wk and executed. The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Conditioning. The language instruction ℓ enters only
through the Octo policy, which shapes the initial planning
distribution. The world model is language-agnostic and
models only visual-action dynamics. The goal image og
is encoded into zg and enters through the planning cost in
Eq. 4.

4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Dataset. We train and evaluate on the CAST dataset [6], a
large-scale visual navigation dataset augmented with counterfactual instruction-action pairs. CAST addresses the
problem of posterior collapse—where the policy ignores the
language instruction because the observation alone suffices
to predict the action—by using a VLM to generate alternative instructions and an atomic policy to produce corresponding counterfactual action labels. Each action is a 4dimensional vector a = (∆x, ∆y, sin ∆ϕ, cos ∆ϕ) specifying the robot’s displacement and heading change; the
(sin ∆ϕ, cos ∆ϕ) encoding avoids angle discontinuities at

▷ diffusion sampling

4:
ã(i) ← T (a(i) )
▷ coordinate transform
5: end for
6: µ0 ← mean({ã(i) })
7: σ 0 ← clamp(std({ã(i) }), σmin , σmax )

a(k)
k wk
q

P


P
(k) −µj+1 )2 , σ
σ j+1 ← clamp
min , σmax
k wk (a
22: end for
23: Sample k ∗ ∈ E with probability wk∗
(k∗ )
24: return a1:H

21:

±π. Actions are normalized to [−1, 1] using bounds normalization based on the 1st and 99th percentile statistics.
Vision encoders. We study two frozen pretrained encoder
families: DINOv2 ViT-S [27], a self-supervised image encoder with strong spatial and object segmentation features;
and V-JEPA-2 ViT-L [28], a self-supervised video encoder
that captures temporal dynamics. For V-JEPA-2, we follow
the frame-duplication strategy of [13], encoding each frame
as a duplicated 2-frame video. We apply layer normalization to the encoder output to stabilize prediction targets and
the planning cost landscape.
Policy training. We finetune the Octo-Small model [4] on
CAST, replacing its original visual encoder with the frozen
pretrained encoder Eϕ followed by a learnable projection
Wproj ∈ Rd×docto . Language instructions are encoded with a
pretrained T5 model [29] (16 tokens). The diffusion action

head is a 3-layer MLP with residual connections, trained
with the DDPM objective [30] using a cosine noise schedule. Training uses the CAST-augmented data including both
original and counterfactual trajectory segments.
Coordinate transform. The Octo policy outputs globalframe displacements, while the world model expects local
body-frame actions. We bridge this gap by accumulating
headings from the (sin ∆ϕ, cos ∆ϕ) components and rotating the displacement into the robot’s local frame at each
timestep:
Pt−1
ϕt = τ =0 atan2(sin ∆ϕτ , cos ∆ϕτ ),
 ℓ 


∆xt
cos ϕt
sin ϕt
∆xt
=
.
− sin ϕt cos ϕt
∆yt
∆ytℓ

• Octo-WM: Draws Nπ samples from the policy, evaluates
each via a full world model rollout, and selects the sample with the lowest cost Lp —using the world model for
scoring without trajectory optimization.
• Octo: Octo predicted actions with no world model involvement, serving as a pure reactive policy baseline.
We report Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) and Relative Pose Error (RPE) for both XY position (in meters)
and heading (in degrees), computed between predicted and
ground-truth trajectories on the CAST validation set.

4.3. Results
(7)

The rotated actions are then normalized to [−1, 1] using the
dataset bounds statistics.
World model training. The JEPA world model predictor
is a ViT with frame-causal attention and Adaptive Layer
Normalization (AdaLN) action conditioning [13, 31], which
modulates scale and shift at every transformer block. It
is trained on CAST trajectory segments with the multistep rollout loss (Eq. 2) using truncated backpropagation
through time. The encoder weights remain frozen; only the
predictor and action encoder parameters are updated. All
experiments were conducted on four NVIDIA H200 GPUs.
Encoder variants. We train four model configurations to
systematically study encoder choice: (i) DINOv2-Policy +
DINOv2-WM, the most natural consistent-space pairing;
(ii) V-JEPA-2-Policy + V-JEPA-2-WM, leveraging temporal features in both components; (iii) DINOv2-Policy + VJEPA-2-WM; and (iv) V-JEPA-2-Policy + DINOv2-WM.
The cross-encoder configurations test whether the action
prior from one representation space transfers to planning
in another. Prior work [13] found DINOv2 excels at finegrained spatial reasoning while V-JEPA-2 captures richer
temporal structure; evaluating all four combinations reveals
which properties matter for the policy prior versus latent
dynamics.
MPPI hyperparameters. We use J = 4 MPPI iterations,
N = 32 candidate samples, K = 4 elites, inverse temperature λ = 0.8, and Nπ = 4 Octo diffusion samples
for the policy prior. The standard deviation is clamped to
[σmin , σmax ] = [0.01, 0.05].

4.2. Baselines and Evaluation
To isolate the contribution of each component, we compare
four planning strategies:
• Default MPPI: Standard MPPI initialized with µ0 = 0,
σ 0 = σmax , serving as a pure world model planning baseline.
• PiJEPA (ours): Warm-started MPPI with µ0 = µπ , σ 0 =
σπ from the policy prior (Algorithm 1).

Tables 1 and 2 report the full set of trajectory metrics for
the DINOv2 and V-JEPA-2 encoder configurations, respectively. We discuss the main findings below.
PiJEPA achieves the best positional accuracy across
both encoders. PiJEPA leads on ATE XY metrics in both
configurations: 1.78 m RMSE and 3.12 m Final with DINOv2, and 1.65 m RMSE and 1.32 m Mean with V-JEPA2, which is the lowest across all settings. Octo-WM narrowly edges PiJEPA on V-JEPA-2 Final position (2.87 m vs.
2.88 m), but PiJEPA dominates on the remaining trajectorylevel metrics, confirming that warm-starting MPPI with a
policy prior enables the planner to refine already-promising
trajectories rather than searching from scratch.
Uninformed MPPI struggles with position but excels at
heading. MPPI exhibits a striking divergence across metric types: it is the weakest method on ATE XY under
V-JEPA-2 (RMSE 1.87 m, Final 3.29 m), confirming that
uninformed initialization wastes the sampling budget, yet
it achieves the best heading metrics across both encoders
(e.g., DINOv2: ATE Hdg RMSE 18.79◦ , RPE Hdg Mean
5.11◦ ). We attribute this to the embedding-space objective
implicitly regularizing heading alignment even when translational accuracy is poor.
World model scoring captures much of the planning
benefit. Octo-WM provides large positional gains over
the raw Octo policy—with V-JEPA-2, ATE XY Final drops
from 3.02 m to 2.87 m—suggesting that even without iterative optimization, using the world model to filter poor policy
proposals is a powerful strategy. The relatively small gap
between Octo-WM and PiJEPA indicates that filtering accounts for much of the benefit, though the additional MPPI
refinement still yields the best overall trajectory accuracy.
The reactive policy provides strong local control. Despite lacking look-ahead, Octo remains competitive on steplevel metrics: with V-JEPA-2 it achieves the best RPE XY
Mean (0.48 m) and strongest ATE Heading (RMSE 18.72◦ ,

(a) DINOv2 encoder

Start

Goal

Language instruction:“Move forward with
minor course correction”
(b) V-JEPA-2 encoder

Figure 2. Qualitative trajectory comparison. Given a start observation, goal image, and language instruction (left), we compare trajectories produced by each method under two encoder backbones (right). The black curve (GT) shows the ground-truth path; colored curves
show MPPI (red), Octo policy (blue), Octo-WM scoring (orange), and PiJEPA (green). Stars mark final positions. PiJEPA most closely
tracks the ground truth in both settings.
Table 1. DINOv2 ViT-S on CAST validation episodes. Best in bold. All ↓.
ATE XY (m)

ATE Hdg (◦ )

RPE XY (m) RPE Hdg (◦ )

RMSE Mean Final RMSE Mean Final RMSE Mean RMSE Mean
Octo
MPPI
Octo-WM
PiJEPA

1.98
1.85
1.80
1.78

1.65
1.48
1.43
1.42

3.19
3.23
3.15
3.12

20.08
18.79
22.16
19.89

16.76 28.55
15.68 27.86
18.60 29.16
16.52 28.63

0.61
0.55
0.56
0.56

0.57
0.51
0.51
0.51

8.29
5.70
7.51
7.05

6.94
5.11
6.45
6.07

Final 27.72◦ ) as shown in Table 2. Planning thus contributes
its main benefit at the trajectory level, where cumulative errors compound. PiJEPA and Octo are nearly indistinguishable on step-level RPE XY (0.53 vs. 0.53 m RMSE), yet
PiJEPA opens a clear gap on trajectory-level ATE XY (1.65
vs. 1.72 m RMSE, 2.88 vs. 3.02 m Final), confirming that
the planning stage prevents per-step errors from accumulating over the full horizon.

sampling, while the MPPI planning stage adds only 0.35 s,
bringing the total PiJEPA inference time to roughly 2.48 s
for an 8-step trajectory. The lightweight MPPI overhead
demonstrates that the planning stage is practical to layer
on top of the policy, with the vast majority of latency attributable to the diffusion-based action sampling rather than
the world model rollouts.

V-JEPA-2 yields stronger overall performance. VJEPA-2 with PiJEPA achieves the best overall positional accuracy, and even its Octo baseline (ATE XY RMSE 1.72 m)
surpasses the best DINOv2 method (1.78 m). However,
uninformed MPPI performs worst under V-JEPA-2 (Final
3.29 m vs. 3.23 m for DINOv2), suggesting its richer latent dynamics create a harder optimization landscape for
uninformed search. Once anchored by the policy prior, this
space becomes an asset: the gap between PiJEPA and uninformed MPPI on ATE XY Final grows from 0.11 m (DINOv2) to 0.41 m (V-JEPA-2).

Qualitative results and failure analysis. Figure 2 shows
that PiJEPA (green) most closely tracks the ground-truth
path under both encoders, while MPPI (red) deviates substantially and Octo (blue) drifts over longer horizons. Figure 3 presents a failure case with the ambiguous instruction “Follow the building,” where the Octo policy veers
toward the wrong building. The world model itself gets
stuck in its rollouts, and the predicted latent states remain
nearly identical across the planning horizon regardless of
the sampled actions, leaving the planner unable to make
progress. PiJEPA partially mitigates this through the policy
prior, which bypasses the stalled rollouts by anchoring the
search in a productive region of action space, though it still
undershoots the ground truth, indicating that ambiguous instructions and world model stagnation remain challenging.

Planning latency. The Octo policy requires approximately 2.13 s to generate its action proposals via diffusion

Table 2. V-JEPA-2 ViT-L on CAST validation episodes. Best in bold. All ↓.
ATE Hdg (◦ )

ATE XY (m)

RPE XY (m) RPE Hdg (◦ )

RMSE Mean Final RMSE Mean Final RMSE Mean RMSE Mean
Octo
MPPI
Octo-WM
PiJEPA

1.72
1.87
1.67
1.65

1.36
1.50
1.35
1.32

3.02
3.29
2.87
2.88

18.72
19.15
20.63
19.13

15.64 27.72
15.98 28.50
17.27 28.06
15.95 27.93

0.53
0.55
0.54
0.53

0.48
0.52
0.49
0.49

6.09
5.75
6.93
6.46

5.34
5.15
5.99
5.62

Language instruction: “Follow the building”
Frame 1

Frame 3

Frame 5

Frame 7

WM Pred.

GT

Frame 0

Figure 3. Failure case analysis. The language instruction “Follow the building” is inherently ambiguous, as multiple buildings are visible
in the scene. The Octo policy (blue) misinterprets the referent and veers toward a different building, illustrating how vague instructions
can mislead reactive policies that lack long-horizon reasoning. Meanwhile, the world model fails to make meaningful progress because it
becomes stuck in its rollouts, predicting nearly identical latent states, which causes the planner to stagnate. The WM Pred. row confirms
this directly. The predicted observations remain largely unchanged across the planning horizon. PiJEPA (green) partially mitigates both
issues by grounding the planner with a policy-derived prior, though it still undershoots the ground-truth trajectory.

5. Conclusion

richer action spaces, and closed-loop replanning.

We have presented PiJEPA, a framework for instructionconditioned visual navigation that warm-starts MPPI planning over a JEPA world model using a finetuned VLA
policy prior. PiJEPA achieves the best positional accuracy across both DINOv2 and V-JEPA-2 encoders, outperforming reactive policies, uninformed planning, and world
model scoring baselines. Our analysis reveals a natural division of labor: the reactive policy excels at local control
and heading prediction, uninformed MPPI achieves strong
heading alignment through its embedding-space objective,
and world model scoring captures much of the look-ahead
benefit by filtering poor proposals. PiJEPA combines these
strengths with the additional MPPI refinement, yielding the
best trajectory-level coherence. The MPPI planning latency
overhead is negligible relative to the accuracy gains. However, our failure analysis reveals that the world model can
become stuck in its rollouts, producing static latent predictions that render the planner ineffective. Addressing
this stagnation through improved dynamics architectures
or diversity-promoting rollout mechanisms is a key direction for future work, alongside intermediate waypoint costs,

6. Acknowledgment
Computational resources were provided in part through
NSF MRI Award Number 2320600.

References
[1] Y. Zhu, R. Mottaghi, E. Kolve, J. J. Lim, A. Gupta, L. FeiFei, and A. Farhadi, “Target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes using deep reinforcement learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2017.
1
[2] P. Anderson, Q. Wu, D. Teney, J. Bruce, M. Johnson,
N. Sünderhauf, I. Reid, S. Gould, and A. van den Hengel, “Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visuallygrounded navigation instructions in real environments,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
[3] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, N. Dashora, K. Stachowicz, K. Black,
N. Hirose, and S. Levine, “ViNT: A foundation model for
visual navigation,” in Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
1
[4] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. R. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black,

O. Mees, S. Dasari, J. Hejna, T. Kreiman, C. Xu, J. Luo, Y. L.
Tan, P. R. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Xiao, D. Sadigh, C. Finn,
and S. Levine, “Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2405.12213, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4
[5] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen,
K. Choromanski, et al., “RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
[6] C. Glossop, W. Chen, A. Bhorkar, D. Shah, and S. Levine,
“CAST: Counterfactual labels improve instruction following in vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.13446, 2025. 1, 4
[7] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine, “NoMaD:
Goal masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07896, 2023. 1
[8] Y. LeCun, “A path towards autonomous machine intelligence,” OpenReview preprint, 2022. 1
[9] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap, “Mastering diverse domains through world models,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[10] N. Hansen, H. Su, and X. Wang, “TD-MPC2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.16828, 2024.
[11] A. Bar, G. Zhou, D. Tran, T. Darrell, and Y. LeCun, “Navigation world models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03572, 2024.
2
[12] G. Zhou, H. Pan, Y. LeCun, and L. Pinto, “Dino-wm: World
models on pre-trained visual features enable zero-shot planning,” 2024. 1, 2, 3
[13] B. Terver, T.-Y. Yang, J. Ponce, A. Bardes, and Y. LeCun, “What drives success in physical planning with jointembedding predictive world models?,” 2025. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
[14] M. Assran et al., “V-JEPA-2-AC: Vision joint-embedding
predictive architecture with action conditioning,” arXiv
preprint, 2025. 1
[15] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and
E. A. Theodorou, “Aggressive driving with model predictive
path integral control,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2016. 1, 3
[16] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M.
Rehg, B. Boots, and E. A. Theodorou, “Information theoretic
MPC for model-based reinforcement learning,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2017. 1,
3
[17] R. Rubinstein, “The cross-entropy method for combinatorial
and continuous optimization,” Methodology and Computing
in Applied Probability, vol. 1, pp. 127–190, 1999. 1
[18] Z. Hou, T. Zhang, Y. Xiong, H. Duan, H. Pu, R. Tong,
C. Zhao, X. Zhu, Y. Qiao, J. Dai, and Y. Chen, “Dita: Scaling
diffusion transformer for generalist vision-language-action
policy,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2503.19757, 2025. 2
[19] S. Ye, J. Jang, B. Jeon, S. J. Joo, J. Yang, B. Peng, A. Mandlekar, R. Tan, Y.-W. Chao, B. Y. Lin, L. Lidén, K. Lee,
J. Gao, L. S. Zettlemoyer, D. Fox, and M. Seo, “Latent action pretraining from videos,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2410.11758,
2024. 2

[20] C. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Gao, Y. Su, T. Dai, C. Zhou, J. Lu,
and Y. Tang, “Clap: Contrastive latent action pretraining for learning vision-language-action models from human
videos,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2601.04061, 2026. 2
[21] Y. Mei, Y. Yang, L. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Yu, X. He,
W. Wu, and J. Liu, “Urbannav: Learning language-guided
urban navigation from web-scale human trajectories,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/2512.09607, 2025. 2
[22] Q. Garrido, T. Nagarajan, B. Terver, N. Ballas, Y. LeCun,
and M. Rabbat, “Learning latent action world models in the
wild,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2601.05230, 2026. 2
[23] R. Balestriero and Y. LeCun, “Lejepa: Provable and scalable self-supervised learning without the heuristics,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/2511.08544, 2025. 2
[24] J. Sun, W. Zhang, Z. Qi, S. Ren, Z. Liu, H. Zhu, G. Sun,
X. Jin, and Z. Chen, “Vla-jepa: Enhancing vision-languageaction model with latent world model,” 2026. 2
[25] W. Shen, Z. Meng, J. Ma, M. Zhou, and D. Xiang, “An efficient and multi-modal navigation system with one-step world
model,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2601.12277, 2026. 2
[26] D. Wang, H. Ye, Z. Liang, Z. Sun, Z. Lu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao,
Y. Gao, M. Seegert, F. Schäfer, H. Qin, W. Li, L. Palmieri,
F. Jahncke, M. Piccinini, and J. Betz, “Target-bench: Can
world models achieve mapless path planning with semantic
targets?,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2511.17792, 2025. 2
[27] M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec,
V. Khalidov, P. Fernandez, D. Haziza, F. Massa, A. ElNouby, et al., “DINOv2: Learning robust visual features
without supervision,” Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2024. 4
[28] M. Assran et al., “V-JEPA-2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, generation and planning,” arXiv
preprint, 2025. 4
[29] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang,
M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 21,
no. 140, pp. 1–67, 2020. 4
[30] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. 5
[31] W. Peebles and S. Xie, “Scalable diffusion models with
transformers,” in International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023. 5

